So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood;
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy;
Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight: when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news;
Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered;
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
By those Welshwomen done as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This match'd with other did, my gracious lord;
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north and thus it did import:
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
As by discharge of their artillery,
And shape of likelihood, the news was told;
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.
Stain'd with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas; and the Earl of Athol,
And is not this an honourable spoil?
A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son,
A son who is the theme of honour's tongue;
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant;
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonour stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,
Which he in this adventure hath surprised,
To his own use he keeps; and sends me word,
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects;
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this;
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
Will hold at Windsor; so inform the lords:
But come yourself with speed to us again;
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.
Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack
What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal; for we that take
I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, God
No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to
Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.
Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too; for the
By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my
As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And
How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and
Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
No; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.
Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch;
Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent
Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have
Well, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my
Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman
Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.
Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of
Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed
Thou didst well; for wisdom cries out in the
O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able
I'll be damned for never a king's son in
Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?
I see a good amendment of life in thee; from praying
Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal; 'tis no sin for a
Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?
Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four
Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke
Hear ye, Yedward; if I tarry at home and go not,
Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good
Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.
Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.
By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.
Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:
I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him
Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!
Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us
How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why, we will set forth before or after them, and
Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our
Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
Well, for two of them, I know them to be as
Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The unyoked humour of your idleness:
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So, when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;
And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offence a skill;
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me; for accordingly
You tread upon my patience: but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition;
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it;
And that same greatness too which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.
Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye:
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us: when we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is deliver'd to your majesty:
Is guilty of this fault and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,
Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin new reap'd
Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home;
He was perfumed like a milliner;
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose and took't away again;
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk'd,
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He question'd me; amongst the rest, demanded
My prisoners in your majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pester'd with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience,
Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,
He should or he should not; for he made me mad
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--
And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth
Was parmaceti for an inward bruise;
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd
So cowardly; and but for these vile guns,
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answer'd indirectly, as I said;
And I beseech you, let not his report
Betwixt my love and your high majesty.
The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,
Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war; to prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
In single opposition, hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
Three times they breathed and three times did
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood;
Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Never did base and rotten policy
Colour her working with such deadly wounds;
Receive so many, and all willingly:
Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him;
He never did encounter with Glendower:
He durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,
We licence your departure with your son.
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
An if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them: I will after straight
And tell him so; for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:
Want mercy, if I do not join with him:
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.
Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners;
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd
By Richard that dead is the next of blood?
He was; I heard the proclamation:
And then it was when the unhappy king,
From whence he intercepted did return
To be deposed and shortly murdered.
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you; did King Richard then
He did; myself did hear it.
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you, that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murderous subornation, shall it be,
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the agents, or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me that I descend so low,
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle king;
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
That men of your nobility and power
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf,
As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
No; yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again,
Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous spirit
As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honour cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks;
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them;
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:
I'll keep them, by this hand.
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
He said he would not ransom Mortimer;
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer;
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him
To keep his anger still in motion.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.
Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you
When you are better temper'd to attend.
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire;
His uncle York; where I first bow'd my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'
And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin;'
O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!
Good uncle, tell your tale; I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again;
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland; which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured,
Will easily be granted. You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate, well beloved,
His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot;
And then the power of Scotland and of York,
In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head;
For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
The king will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home:
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell: no further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer;
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short
Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!
Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks
Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that
Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats
I think this be the most villanous house in all
London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.
Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king
Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we
What, ostler! come away and be hanged!
I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,
God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite
I think it be two o'clock.
I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding
Nay, by God, soft; I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.
I pray thee, lend me thine.
Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant
That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the
Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that
I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the
They are up already, and call for eggs and butter;
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'
No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,
I'll make a fat pair of gallows; for if I hang, old
Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no
I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, the
What, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold
She will, she will; justice hath liquored her. We
Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to
Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our
Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.
Go to; 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid the
Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's
Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost
He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.
I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the
Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!
I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twere
Whew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, you
Peace, ye fat-guts! lie down; lay thine ear close
Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?
What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Thou liest; thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,
Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?
Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent
So I do, against my will.
O, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,
Case ye, case ye; on with your vizards: there 's
You lie, ye rogue; 'tis going to the king's tavern.
There's enough to make us all.
Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane;
Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape
How many be there of them?
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather;
Well, we leave that to the proof.
Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:
Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down
Strike; down with them; cut the villains' throats:
O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!
Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye
You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.
The thieves have bound the true men. Now could thou
Stand close; I hear them coming.
Come, my masters, let us share, and then to  horse
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse:
The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear
So strongly that they dare not meet each other;
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along:
Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.
Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lord
Edmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?
How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.
O, my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offence have I this fortnight been
A banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks;
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars;
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed;
Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'd
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war
And thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream;
And in thy face strange motions have appear'd,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
That roan shall by my throne.
Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse, my love, my horse.
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
As you are toss'd with. In faith,
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise: but if you go,--
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask:
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate: this is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips:
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou
Do you not love me? do you not, indeed?
Well, do not then; for since you love me not,
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am on horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate;
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout:
Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude,
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,
But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
No lady closer; for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know;
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
Not an inch further. But hark you, Kate:
Whither I go, thither shall you go too;
To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me
With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four
They take it already upon their salvation, that
Ned, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped
Anon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
Forsooth, five years, and as much as to--
Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinking
O Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books in
England, I could find in my heart.
Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--
Anon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord.
Nay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thou
O Lord, I would it had been two!
I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask me
Anon, Francis? No, Francis; but to-morrow, Francis;
Wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,
O Lord, sir, who do you mean?
Why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink;
Away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?
What, standest thou still, and hearest such a
My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at
As merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye; what
I am now of all humours that have showed themselves
That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a
Hotspur of the north; he that kills me some six or
Welcome, Jack: where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!
Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?
You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is
I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or any
How now, wool-sack! what mutter you?
A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy
I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!
Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
Are not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?
I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call
O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou
A plague of all cowards, still say I.
What's the matter! there be four of us here have
Where is it, Jack? where is it?
Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon
I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a
I was a man: all would not do. A plague of all
We four set upon some dozen--
No, no, they were not bound.
You rogue, they were bound, every man of them; or I
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
All! I know not what you call all; but if I fought
Jack, then am I no two-legged creature.
Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two
What, four? thou saidst but two even now.
Four, Hal; I told thee four.
These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at
Seven? why, there were but four even now.
Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.
Prithee, let him alone; we shall have more anon.
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine
Began to give me ground: but I followed me close,
O monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!
But, as the devil would have it, three misbegotten
These lies are like their father that begets them;
What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal
Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.
What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the
I'll be no longer guilty of this sin; this sanguine
Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again: and
We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and
What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst
Come, let's hear, Jack; what trick hast thou now?
By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.
Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles
Content; and the argument shall be thy running away.
Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!
O Jesu, my lord the prince!
How now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou to
Marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at
Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and
What manner of man is he?
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall
Now, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair; so did you,
Peto; so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, you
Why, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he would
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to
O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years
My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold
Choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.
How now, my sweet creature of bombast!
How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
My own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I was
Sir John Bracy from your father; you must to the
Owen, Owen, the same; and his son-in-law Mortimer,
Scots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hill
He that rides at high speed and with his pistol
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him; he will not run.
Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so
O' horseback, ye cuckoo; but afoot he will not budge a foot.
I grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too,
Worcester is stolen away to-night; thy father's
Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June and
By the mass, lad, thou sayest true; it is like we
Not a whit, i' faith; I lack some of thy instinct.
Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou
Do thou stand for my father, and examine me upon the
Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state,
Thy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy golden
Well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee,
And here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Weep not, sweet queen; for trickling tears are vain.
O, the father, how he holds his countenance!
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen;
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry
Peace, good pint-pot; peace, good tickle-brain.
Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy
What manner of man, an it like your majesty?
A goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of a
I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may be
Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell
Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me,
Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so
And here I stand: judge, my masters.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er look
I would your grace would take me with you: whom
That villanous abominable misleader of youth,
My lord, the man I know.
But to say I know more harm in him than in myself,
God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be a
Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff,
O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most
Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much to
O Jesu, my lord, my lord!
Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick:
The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: they
Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of
And thou a natural coward, without instinct.
I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff,
I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk up
Both which I have had: but their date is out, and
Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
First, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cry
Hath follow'd certain men unto this house.
One of them is well known, my gracious lord,
The man, I do assure you, is not here;
For I myself at this time have employ'd him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will, by to-morrow dinner-time,
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal:
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so: if he have robb'd these men,
He shall be answerable; and so farewell.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go,
Falstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, and
Hark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.
Let's see what they be: read them.
Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d.
Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.
O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread to
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it!
Sit, cousin Percy; sit, good cousin Hotspur,
For by that name as oft as Lancaster
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
I cannot blame him: at my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning cressets; and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Why, so it would have done at the same season, if
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth
Is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb; which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldam earth and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam earth, having this distemperature,
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary;
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil, or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
Peace, cousin Percy; you will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
Why, so can I, or so can any man;
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
Come, here's the map: shall we divide our right
According to our threefold order ta'en?
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assign'd:
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward, lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn;
A business that this night may execute,
To-morrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords:
And in my conduct shall your ladies come;
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours:
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up;
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel, fair and evenly;
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind? it shall, it must; you see it doth.
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other side;
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
And on this north side win this cape of land;
And then he runs straight and even.
I'll have it so: a little charge will do it.
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.
I can speak English, lord, as well as you;
For I was train'd up in the English court;
Where, being but young, I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament,
A virtue that was never seen in you.
And I am glad of it with all my heart:
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers;
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree;
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry:
Come, you shall have Trent turn'd.
I do not care: I'll give thrice so much land
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair; you may away by night:
I'll haste the writer and withal
Break with your wives of your departure hence:
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.
Fie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!
I cannot choose: sometime he angers me
With telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what;
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
That were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,'
But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife;
Worse than a smoky house: I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion
And as wondrous affable and as bountiful
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come 'cross his humour; faith, he does:
I warrant you, that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof:
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame;
And since your coming hither have done enough
To put him quite beside his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault:
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,--
And that's the dearest grace it renders you,--
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
The least of which haunting a nobleman
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Well, I am school'd: good manners be your speed!
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
This is the deadly spite that angers me;
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps: she will not part with you;
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
She is desperate here; a peevish self-wind harlotry,
I understand thy looks: that pretty Welsh
Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens
I am too perfect in; and, but for shame,
In such a parley should I answer thee.
I understand thy kisses and thou mine,
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep.
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing:
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn
And those musicians that shall play to you
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come,
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh;
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
By'r lady, he is a good musician.
Then should you be nothing but musical for you are
I had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
Wouldst thou have thy head broken?
Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.
Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like a
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,'
Come, come, Lord Mortimer; you are as slow
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn; we'll but seal,
Lords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and I
Must have some private conference; but be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether God will have it so,
For some displeasing service I have done,
That, in his secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me;
But thou dost in thy passages of life
Make me believe that thou art only mark'd
For the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your majesty, I would I could
Quit all offences with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal:
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As, in reproof of many tales devised,
By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers,
I may, for some things true, wherein my youth
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost.
Which by thy younger brother is supplied,
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the court and princes of my blood:
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruin'd, and the soul of every man
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wonder'd at;
That men would tell their children 'This is he;'
Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?'
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dress'd myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new;
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast
And won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with capering fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
Grew a companion to the common streets,
That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community,
Such as is bent on sun-like majesty
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes;
But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face and render'd such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou;
For thou has lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation: not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more;
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou the shadow of succession;
For of no right, nor colour like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
And, being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honour hath he got
Against renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ:
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
Which art my near'st and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
Base inclination and the start of spleen
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so; you shall not find it so:
And God forgive them that so much have sway'd
Your majesty's good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy's head
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son;
When I will wear a garment all of blood
And stain my favours in a bloody mask,
Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it:
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
That this same child of honour and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honour sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! for the time will come,
That I shall make this northern youth exchange
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf;
And I will call him to so strict account,
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This, in the name of God, I promise here:
The which if He be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance:
If not, the end of life cancels all bands;
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this:
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand,
As ever offer'd foul play in the state.
The Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day;
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster;
For this advertisement is five days old:
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward;
On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meeting
Is Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall march
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business: let's away;
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this last
I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some
Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song; make
Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs
Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life:
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
No, I'll be sworn; I make as good use of it as many
Dives that lived in purple; for there he is in his
Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and
God-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned.
How now, Dame Partlet the hen! have you inquired
Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do you
I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy
Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost many
Who, I? no; I defy thee: God's light, I was never
Go to, I know you well enough.
No, Sir John; You do not know me, Sir John. I know
Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to
Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight
John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent
He had his part of it; let him pay.
He? alas, he is poor; he hath nothing.
How! poor? look upon his face; what call you rich?
Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younker
O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know not
How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, an
How now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith?
Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
My lord, I pray you, hear me.
What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy
Prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras
Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds of
So I told him, my lord; and I said I heard your
There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed
What thing! why, a thing to thank God on.
I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou
Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
An otter, Sir John! Why an otter?
Why, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not
Thou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or any
Thou sayest true, hostess; and he slanders thee most grossly.
So he doth you, my lord; and said this other day you
Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?
A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is worth
Nay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he would
Indeed, Sir John, you said so.
Yea, if he said my ring was copper.
I say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now?
Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare:
And why not as the lion?
The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thou
I do, I pray God my girdle break.
O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy
Dost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state of
Falstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest I
It appears so by the story.
Hostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast;
Now Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery,
O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to
O, I do not like that paying back; 'tis a double labour.
I am good friends with my father and may do any thing.
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and
I have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.
I would it had been of horse. Where shall I find
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to my
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse; for thou and I have
Jack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at two
There shalt thou know thy charge; and there receive
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning; Percy stands on high;
And either we or they must lower lie.
Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!
Well said, my noble Scot: if speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter; I do defy
The tongues of soothers; but a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself:
Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
Thou art the king of honour:
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
What letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.
These letters come from your father.
Letters from him! why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord; he is grievous sick.
In such a rustling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth;
And at the time of my departure thence
He was much fear'd by his physicians.
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited:
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now! droop now! this sickness doth infect
The very life-blood of our enterprise;
He writes me here, that inward sickness--
And that his friends by deputation could not
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us;
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.
Because the king is certainly possess'd
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off:
And yet, in faith, it is not; his present want
Seems more than we shall find it: were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? to set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good; for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Where now remains a sweet reversion:
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto.
If that the devil and mischance look big
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here.
The quality and hair of our attempt
Brooks no division: it will be thought
By some, that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the earl from hence:
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction
And breed a kind of question in our cause;
For well you know we of the offering side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us:
This absence of your father's draws a curtain,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Than if the earl were here; for men must think,
If we without his help can make a head
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think: there is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards; with him Prince John.
The king himself in person is set forth,
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside,
All plumed like estridges that with the wind
Baited like eagles having lately bathed;
Glittering in golden coats, like images;
As full of spirit as the month of May,
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'd
Rise from the ground like feather'd Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more: worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come:
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them:
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
And yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales:
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the king's whole battle reach unto?
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day
Come, let us take a muster speedily:
Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.
Talk not of dying: I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one-half year.
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a
Will you give me money, captain?
An if it do, take it for thy labour; and if it make
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused
I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty
Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the
How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!
What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thou
Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were
The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must
Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to
I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath
I did never see such pitiful rascals.
Tut, tut; good enough to toss; food for powder, food
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor
No I'll be sworn; unless you call three fingers on
He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.
To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
You give him then the advantage.
Why say you so? looks he not for supply?
His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Good cousin, be advised; stir not tonight.
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas: by my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well-respected honour bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives:
Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle
Come, come it nay not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition: certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up:
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today;
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemy
In general, journey-bated and brought low:
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the king exceedeth ours:
For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the king,
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to God
Some of us love you well; and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
So long as out of limit and true rule
But to my charge. The king hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the king
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs; and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
The king is kind; and well we know the king
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears;
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore;
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his livery and beg his peace,
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance and perform'd it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee;
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh;
And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his country's wrongs; and by this face,
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for;
Proceeded further; cut me off the heads
Of all the favourites that the absent king
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
In short time after, he deposed the king;
Soon after that, deprived him of his life;
And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state:
To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March,
Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited;
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence;
Rated mine uncle from the council-board;
In rage dismiss'd my father from the court;
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety; and withal to pry
Into his title, the which we find
Shall I return this answer to the king?
Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.
Go to the king; and let there be impawn'd
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall my uncle
Bring him our purposes: and so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.
Hie, good Sir Michael; bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the lord marshal;
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do to import, you would make haste.
To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The king with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too
And comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the king.
Why, my good lord, you need not fear;
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head
And so there is: but yet the king hath drawn
The special head of all the land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt;
And moe corrivals and dear men
Of estimation and command in arms.
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear;
And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the king
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him:
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends; and so farewell, Sir Michael.
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves
Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? will you again unknit
This curlish knot of all-abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the lag-end of my life
With quiet hours; for I do protest,
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
You have not sought it! how comes it, then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
It pleased your majesty to turn your looks
Of favour from myself and all our house;
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time; and posted day and night
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother and his son,
That brought you home and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state;
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rain'd down fortune showering on your head;
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent king,
What with the injuries of a wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the king
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly woo'd
To gripe the general sway into your hand;
Forget your oath to us at Doncaster;
And being fed by us you used us so
As that ungentle hull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest;
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced, for safety sake, to fly
Out of sight and raise this present head;
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate,
Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,
To face the garment of rebellion
With some fine colour that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water-colours to impaint his cause;
Nor moody beggars, starving for a time
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to chivalry;
And so I hear he doth account me too;
Yet this before my father's majesty--
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Do make against it. No, good Worcester, no,
We love our people well; even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin's part;
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, every man
Shall be my friend again and I'll be his:
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do: but if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us
And they shall do their office. So, be gone;
We will not now be troubled with reply:
We offer fair; take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life:
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge;
For, on their answer, will we set on them:
And God befriend us, as our cause is just!
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride
Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
I  would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
Honour hath no skill in surgery, then? no. What is
Doth he hear it? no. 'Tis insensible, then. Yea,
I'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and so
O, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the king.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The king should keep his word in loving us;
He will suspect us still and find a time
To punish this offence in other faults:
Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes;
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,
The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot;
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hair-brain'd Hotspur, govern'd by a spleen:
All his offences live upon my head
And on his father's; we did train him on,
And, his corruption being ta'en from us,
We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,
In any case, the offer of the king.
Deliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so.
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.
The king will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the king.
Did you beg any? God forbid!
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his oath-breaking; which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn:
He calls us rebels, traitors; and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen; to arms! for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it;
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?
No, by my soul; I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man;
Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,
Spoke to your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued in you;
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself;
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he master'd there a double spirit.
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause: but let me tell the world,
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
On his follies: never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a libertine.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do
Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
My lord, here are letters for you.
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
To spend that shortness basely were too long,
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings;
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,
When the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare; the king comes on apace.
I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking; only this--
Let each man do his best: and here draw I
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
And by that music let us all embrace;
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name, that in the battle thus
Thou crossest me? what honour dost thou seek
Know then, my name is Douglas;
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought
Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,
This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot;
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
All's done, all's won; here breathless lies the king.
This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well:
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt;
Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear:
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The king hath many marching in his coats.
Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
Though I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fear
Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honour
What, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee,
O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.
Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have
He is, indeed; and living to kill thee. I prithee,
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st
Give it to me: what, is it in the case?
Ay, Hal; 'tis hot, 'tis hot; there's that will sack a city.
What, is it a time to jest and dally now?
Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he do
Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleed'st too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your majesty, make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help:
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on,
We breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland,
Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come.
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster;
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John;
But now, I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
With lustier maintenance than I did look for
Another king! they grow like Hydra's heads:
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colours on them: what art thou,
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The king himself; who, Douglas, grieves at heart
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field:
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit;
And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king:
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again! the spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee;
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly, my lord	how fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.
Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,
And show'd thou makest some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God! they did me too much injury
That ever said I hearken'd for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
Make up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more:
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere;
Nor can one England brook a double reign,
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come
To end the one of us; and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee;
And all the budding honours on thy crest
I'll crop, to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no
O, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth!
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me;
They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:
But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool;
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust
For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound;
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal:
But let my favours hide thy mangled face;
And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remember'd in thy epitaph!
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man:
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with vanity!
Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowell'd will I see thee by and by:
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too
Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die,
Therefore I'll make him sure; yea, and I'll swear I
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh'd
But, soft! whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did; I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak; we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.
No, that's certain; I am not a double man: but if I
Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
I'll follow, as they say, for reward. He that
I'll grow less; for I'll purge, and leave sack, and
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,
Pardon and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain to-day,
A noble earl and many a creature else
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne
What I have done my safety urged me to;
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:
Other offenders we will pause upon.
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is; and I beseech your grace
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free:
His valour shown upon our crests to-day
Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the cheque of such another day:
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
