Open your ears; for which of you will stop
The vent of hearing when loud Rumour speaks?
I, from the orient to the drooping west,
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold
The acts commenced on this ball of earth:
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,
The which in every language I pronounce,
Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.
I speak of peace, while covert enmity
Under the smile of safety wounds the world:
And who but Rumour, who but only I,
Make fearful musters and prepared defence,
Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief,
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,
And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe
And of so easy and so plain a stop
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,
Can play upon it. But what need I thus
Among my household? Why is Rumour here?
I run before King Harry's victory;
Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury
Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,
Quenching the flame of bold rebellion
Even with the rebel's blood. But what mean I
To speak so true at first? my office is
To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell
Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,
And that the king before the Douglas' rage
Stoop'd his anointed head as low as death.
This have I rumour'd through the peasant towns
Between that royal field of Shrewsbury
And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,
Lies crafty-sick: the posts come tiring on,
And not a man of them brings other news
Than they have learn'd of me: from Rumour's tongues
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than
Who keeps the gate here, ho?
What shall I say you are?
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.
His lordship is walk'd forth into the orchard;
Please it your honour, knock but at the gate,
What news, Lord Bardolph? every minute now
Should be the father of some stratagem:
The times are wild: contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose
And bears down all before him.
I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.
As good as heart can wish:
The king is almost wounded to the death;
And, in the fortune of my lord your son,
Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts
Kill'd by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field;
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,
Is prisoner to your son: O, such a day,
So fought, so follow'd and so fairly won,
Came not till now to dignify the times,
Saw you the field? came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence,
A gentleman well bred and of good name,
That freely render'd me these news for true.
Here comes my servant Travers, whom I sent
On Tuesday last to listen after news.
My lord, I over-rode him on the way;
And he is furnish'd with no certainties
More than he haply may retail from me.
Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?
My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turn'd me back
With joyful tidings; and, being better horsed,
Out-rode me. After him came spurring hard
A gentleman, almost forspent with speed,
That stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse.
He ask'd the way to Chester; and of him
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury:
He told me that rebellion had bad luck
And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold.
With that, he gave his able horse the head,
And bending forward struck his armed heels
Against the panting sides of his poor jade
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so
He seem'd in running to devour the way,
Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?
My lord, I'll tell you what;
If my young lord your son have not the day,
Upon mine honour, for a silken point
I'll give my barony: never talk of it.
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers
Give then such instances of loss?
He was some hilding fellow that had stolen
The horse he rode on, and, upon my life,
Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news.
Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-leaf,
Foretells the nature of a tragic volume:
So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood
Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord;
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask
How doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest; and the whiteness in thy cheek
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.
This thou wouldst say, 'Your son did thus and thus;
Your brother thus: so fought the noble Douglas:'
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds:
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,
Ending with 'Brother, son, and all are dead.'
Douglas is living, and your brother, yet;
But, for my lord your son--
See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!
He that but fears the thing he would not know
Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes
That what he fear'd is chanced. Yet speak, Morton;
Tell thou an earl his divination lies,
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
You are too great to be by me gainsaid:
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
Yet, for all this, say not that Percy's dead.
I see a strange confession in thine eye:
Thou shakest thy head and hold'st it fear or sin
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so;
The tongue offends not that reports his death:
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,
Not he which says the dead is not alive.
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
Hath but a losing office, and his tongue
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell,
I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.
I am sorry I should force you to believe
That which I would to God I had not seen;
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,
Rendering faint quittance, wearied and out-breathed,
To Harry Monmouth; whose swift wrath beat down
The never-daunted Percy to the earth,
From whence with life he never more sprung up.
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp,
Being bruited once, took fire and heat away
From the best temper'd courage in his troops;
For from his metal was his party steel'd;
Which once in him abated, all the rest
Turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead:
And as the thing that's heavy in itself,
Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,
Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear
That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim
Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,
Fly from the field. Then was the noble Worcester
Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot,
The bloody Douglas, whose well-labouring sword
Had three times slain the appearance of the king,
Of those that turn'd their backs, and in his flight,
Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all
Is that the king hath won, and hath sent out
A speedy power to encounter you, my lord,
Under the conduct of young Lancaster
And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.
For this I shall have time enough to mourn.
In poison there is physic; and these news,
Having been well, that would have made me sick,
Being sick, have in some measure made me well:
And as the wretch, whose fever-weaken'd joints,
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs,
Weaken'd with grief, being now enraged with grief,
Are thrice themselves. Hence, therefore, thou nice crutch!
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel
Must glove this hand: and hence, thou sickly quoif!
Thou art a guard too wanton for the head
Which princes, flesh'd with conquest, aim to hit.
Now bind my brows with iron; and approach
The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring
To frown upon the enraged Northumberland!
Let heaven kiss earth! now let not Nature's hand
Keep the wild flood confined! let order die!
And let this world no longer be a stage
To feed contention in a lingering act;
But let one spirit of the first-born Cain
Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
And darkness be the burier of the dead!
This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.
Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honour.
The lives of all your loving complices
Lean on your health; the which, if you give o'er
To stormy passion, must perforce decay.
You cast the event of war, my noble lord,
And summ'd the account of chance, before you said
That, in the dole of blows, your son might drop:
You knew he walk'd o'er perils, on an edge,
More likely to fall in than to get o'er;
You were advised his flesh was capable
Of wounds and scars and that his forward spirit
Would lift him where most trade of danger ranged:
Yet did you say 'Go forth;' and none of this,
The stiff-borne action: what hath then befallen,
Or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth,
More than that being which was like to be?
We all that are engaged to this loss
Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas
That if we wrought our life 'twas ten to one;
And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed
Choked the respect of likely peril fear'd;
And since we are o'erset, venture again.
Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.
I hear for certain, and do speak the truth,
The gentle Archbishop of York is up
With well-appointed powers: he is a man
Who with a double surety binds his followers.
My lord your son had only but the corpse,
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;
For that same word, rebellion, did divide
The action of their bodies from their souls;
And they did fight with queasiness, constrain'd,
As men drink potions, that their weapons only
Seem'd on our side; but, for their spirits and souls,
This word, rebellion, it had froze them up,
As fish are in a pond. But now the bishop
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts,
He's followed both with body and with mind;
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones;
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;
Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,
Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;
And more and less do flock to follow him.
I knew of this before; but, to speak truth,
This present grief had wiped it from my mind.
Go in with me; and counsel every man
The aptest way for safety and revenge:
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed:
Never so few, and never yet more need.
Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the
Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn
I can assure him. What said Master Dombledon about
He said, sir, you should procure him better
Let him be damned, like the glutton! pray God his
He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.
I bought him in Paul's, and he'll buy me a horse in
Smithfield: an I could get me but a wife in the
Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the
Prince for striking him about Bardolph.
Wait, close; I will not see him.
Lord Chief-Justice	What's he that goes there?
Lord Chief-Justice	He that was in question for the robbery?
He, my lord: but he hath since done good service at
Shrewsbury; and, as I hear, is now going with some
Lord Chief-Justice	What, to York? Call him back again.
Boy, tell him I am deaf.
You must speak louder; my master is deaf.
Lord Chief-Justice	I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good.
Go, pluck him by the elbow; I must speak with him.
What! a young knave, and begging! Is there not
Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it
Why, sir, did I say you were an honest man? setting
I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and our
I give thee leave to tell me so! I lay aside that
Sir, my lord would speak with you.
Lord Chief-Justice	Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.
My good lord! God give your lordship good time of
Lord Chief-Justice	Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to
An't please your lordship, I hear his majesty is
Lord Chief-Justice	I talk not of his majesty: you would not come when
And I hear, moreover, his highness is fallen into
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, God mend him! I pray you, let me speak with
This apoplexy is, as I take it, a kind of lethargy,
Lord Chief-Justice	What tell you me of it? be it as it is.
It hath its original from much grief, from study and
Lord Chief-Justice	I think you are fallen into the disease; for you
Very well, my lord, very well: rather, an't please
Lord Chief-Justice	To punish you by the heels would amend the
I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient:
Lord Chief-Justice	I sent for you, when there were matters against you
As I was then advised by my learned counsel in the
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great infamy.
He that buckles him in my belt cannot live in less.
Lord Chief-Justice	Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.
I would it were otherwise; I would my means were
Lord Chief-Justice	You have misled the youthful prince.
The young prince hath misled me: I am the fellow
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed wound: your
Lord Chief-Justice	But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a
To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.
Lord Chief-Justice	What! you are as a candle, the better part burnt
A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow: if I did say
Lord Chief-Justice	There is not a white hair on your face but should
His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.
Lord Chief-Justice	You follow the young prince up and down, like his
Not so, my lord; your ill angel is light; but I hope
You that are old consider not the capacities of us
Lord Chief-Justice	Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth,
My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, God send the prince a better companion!
God send the companion a better prince! I cannot
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, the king hath severed you and Prince Harry: I
Yea; I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But look
Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean
Lord Chief-Justice	Well, be honest, be honest; and God bless your
Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to
Lord Chief-Justice	Not a penny, not a penny; you are too impatient to
If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A man
What money is in my purse?
I can get no remedy against this consumption of the
Mistress Ursula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry
About it: you know where to find me.
A pox of this gout! or, a gout of this pox! for
I will turn diseases to commodity.
Thus have you heard our cause and known our means;
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all,
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes:
And first, lord marshal, what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our arms;
But gladly would be better satisfied
How in our means we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the king.
Our present musters grow upon the file
To five and twenty thousand men of choice;
And our supplies live largely in the hope
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns
With an incensed fire of injuries.
The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus;
Whether our present five and twenty thousand
May hold up head without Northumberland?
But if without him we be thought too feeble,
My judgment is, we should not step too far
Till we had his assistance by the hand;
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this
Of aids incertain should not be admitted.
It was young Hotspur's case at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope,
Eating the air on promise of supply,
Flattering himself in project of a power
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts:
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death
But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.
Yes, if this present quality of war,
Indeed the instant action: a cause on foot
Lives so in hope as in an early spring
We see the appearing buds; which to prove fruit,
Hope gives not so much warrant as despair
That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot, then draw the model;
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the erection;
Which if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the model
In fewer offices, or at last desist
To build at all? Much more, in this great work,
Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down
And set another up, should we survey
The plot of situation and the model,
Question surveyors, know our own estate,
How able such a work to undergo,
To weigh against his opposite; or else
We fortify in paper and in figures,
Using the names of men instead of men:
Like one that draws the model of a house
Beyond his power to build it; who, half through,
Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost
A naked subject to the weeping clouds
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth,
Should be still-born, and that we now possess'd
I think we are a body strong enough,
Even as we are, to equal with the king.
What, is the king but five and twenty thousand?
To us no more; nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph.
For his divisions, as the times do brawl,
Are in three heads: one power against the French,
And one against Glendower; perforce a third
Must take up us: so is the unfirm king
In three divided; and his coffers sound
That he should draw his several strengths together
And come against us in full puissance,
He leaves his back unarm'd, the French and Welsh
Baying him at the heels: never fear that.
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;
Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth:
But who is substituted 'gainst the French,
And publish the occasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice;
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
O thou fond many, with what loud applause
Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke,
Before he was what thou wouldst have him be!
And being now trimm'd in thine own desires,
Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him,
That thou provokest thyself to cast him up.
So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge
Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard;
And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up,
And howl'st to find it. What trust is in
They that, when Richard lived, would have him die,
Are now become enamour'd on his grave:
Thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head
When through proud London he came sighing on
After the admired heels of Bolingbroke,
Criest now 'O earth, yield us that king again,
And take thou this!' O thoughts of men accursed!
Past and to come seems best; things present worst.
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?
We are time's subjects, and time bids be gone.
Master Fang, have you entered the action?
Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman? will a'
O Lord, ay! good Master Snare.
Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.
Yea, good Master Snare; I have entered him and all.
It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.
Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabbed me in
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
No, nor I neither: I'll be at your elbow.
An I but fist him once; an a' come but within my vice,--
I am undone by his going; I warrant you, he's an
Master Smooth's the silkman: I pray ye, since my
Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.
How now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.
Away, varlets! Draw, Bardolph: cut me off the
Throw me in the channel! I'll throw thee in the
Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou wo't, wo't
Away, you scullion! you rampallion! You
Lord Chief-Justice	What is the matter? keep the peace here, ho!
Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you, stand to me.
Lord Chief-Justice	How now, Sir John! what are you brawling here?
Doth this become your place, your time and business?
You should have been well on your way to York.
Stand from him, fellow: wherefore hang'st upon him?
O most worshipful lord, an't please your grace, I am
It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all,
I think I am as like to ride the mare, if I have
Lord Chief-Justice	How comes this, Sir John? Fie! what man of good
Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so
What is the gross sum that I owe thee?
Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the
Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the prince broke
Windsor, thou didst swear to me then, as I was
Keech, the butcher's wife, come in then and call me
My lord, this is a poor mad soul; and she says up
Lord Chief-Justice	Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your
Lord Chief-Justice	Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe her, and
My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without
Lord Chief-Justice	You speak as having power to do wrong: but answer
Lord Chief-Justice	Now, Master Gower, what news?
The king, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales
Are near at hand: the rest the paper tells.
As I am a gentleman. Come, no more words of it.
By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain
Glasses, glasses is the only drinking: and for thy
Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles: i'
Let it alone; I'll make other shift: you'll be a
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown. I
Go, with her, with her; hook on, hook on.
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?
No more words; let's have her.
Lord Chief-Justice	I have heard better news.
Lord Chief-Justice	Where lay the king last night?
I hope, my lord, all's well: what is the news, my lord?
Lord Chief-Justice	Come all his forces back?
No; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,
Are marched up to my lord of Lancaster,
Comes the king back from Wales, my noble lord?
Lord Chief-Justice	You shall have letters of me presently:
Come, go along with me, good Master Gower.
Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?
I must wait upon my good lord here; I thank you,
Lord Chief-Justice	Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to
Will you sup with me, Master Gower?
Lord Chief-Justice	What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir John?
Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool
Lord Chief-Justice	Now the Lord lighten thee! thou art a great fool.
Before God, I am exceeding weary.
Is't come to that? I had thought weariness durst not
Faith, it does me; though it discolours the
Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as
Belike then my appetite was not princely got; for,
How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard,
Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?
Yes, faith; and let it be an excellent good thing.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.
Go to; I stand the push of your one thing that you
Marry, I tell thee, it is not meet that I should be
Very hardly upon such a subject.
By this hand thou thinkest me as far in the devil's
What wouldst thou think of me, if I should weep?
I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.
It would be every man's thought; and thou art a
Why, because you have been so lewd and so much
By this light, I am well spoke on; I can hear it
And the boy that I gave Falstaff: a' had him from
Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you
A' calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red
Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!
Away, you rascally Althaea's dream, away!
Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?
Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamed she was delivered
A crown's worth of good interpretation: there 'tis,
O, that this good blossom could be kept from
An you do not make him hanged among you, the
And how doth thy master, Bardolph?
Well, my lord. He heard of your grace's coming to
Delivered with good respect. And how doth the
Marry, the immortal part needs a physician; but
I do allow this wen to be as familiar with me as my
Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it
Wales, greeting.' Why, this is a certificate.
Poins; for he misuses thy favours so much, that he
Thine, by yea and no, which is as much as to
My lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.
That's to make him eat twenty of his words. But do
God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.
Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the
Is your master here in London?
Where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.
Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and
A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master's.
Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town
I am your shadow, my lord; I'll follow you.
Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your
And for mine, sir, I will govern it.
This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.
I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to-night
Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait
From a God to a bull? a heavy decension! it was
Jove's case. From a prince to a prentice? a low
I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs:
Put not you on the visage of the times
And be like them to Percy troublesome.
I have given over, I will speak no more:
Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.
Alas, sweet wife, my honour is at pawn;
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.
O yet, for God's sake, go not to these wars!
The time was, father, that you broke your word,
When you were more endeared to it than now;
When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry,
Threw many a northward look to see his father
Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.
Who then persuaded you to stay at home?
There were two honours lost, yours and your son's.
For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!
For his, it stuck upon him as the sun
In the grey vault of heaven, and by his light
Did all the chivalry of England move
To do brave acts: he was indeed the glass
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves:
He had no legs that practised not his gait;
And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish,
Became the accents of the valiant;
For those that could speak low and tardily
Would turn their own perfection to abuse,
To seem like him: so that in speech, in gait,
In diet, in affections of delight,
In military rules, humours of blood,
He was the mark and glass, copy and book,
That fashion'd others. And him, O wondrous him!
O miracle of men! him did you leave,
Second to none, unseconded by you,
To look upon the hideous god of war
In disadvantage; to abide a field
Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name
Did seem defensible: so you left him.
Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong
To hold your honour more precise and nice
With others than with him! let them alone:
The marshal and the archbishop are strong:
Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,
To-day might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck,
Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me
But I must go and meet with danger there,
Or it will seek me in another place
Till that the nobles and the armed commons
Have of their puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground and vantage of the king,
Then join you with them, like a rib of steel,
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,
First let them try themselves. So did your son;
He was so suffer'd: so came I a widow;
And never shall have length of life enough
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven,
For recordation to my noble husband.
Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind
As with the tide swell'd up unto his height,
That makes a still-stand, running neither way:
Fain would I go to meet the archbishop,
But many thousand reasons hold me back.
I will resolve for Scotland: there am I,
Till time and vantage crave my company.
What the devil hast thou brought there? apple-johns?
Mass, thou sayest true. The prince once set a dish
Why, then, cover, and set them down: and see if
Tearsheet would fain hear some music. Dispatch: the
Sirrah, here will be the prince and Master Poins
By the mass, here will be old Utis: it will be an
I'll see if I can find out Sneak.
I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an
Why, that's well said; a good heart's worth gold.
Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
So is all her sect; an they be once in a calm, they are sick.
You muddy rascal, is that all the comfort you give me?
You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.
I make them! gluttony and diseases make them; I
If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to
Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full
Bourdeaux stuff in him; you have not seen a hulk
Sir, Ancient Pistol's below, and would speak with
Hang him, swaggering rascal! let him not come
If he swagger, let him not come here: no, by my
Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John: there comes no
Dost thou hear? it is mine ancient.
Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne'er tell me: your ancient
Tisick, the debuty, t'other day; and, as he said to
Dumbe, our minister, was by then; 'neighbour
Quickly,' says he, 'receive those that are civil;
He's no swaggerer, hostess; a tame cheater, i'
Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my
Do I? yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an aspen
Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I charge
I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.
She is Pistol-proof, sir; you shall hardly offend
Come, I'll drink no proofs nor no bullets: I'll
Then to you, Mistress Dorothy; I will charge you.
Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What!
Away, you cut-purse rascal! you filthy bung, away!
God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.
No more, Pistol; I would not have you go off here:
No, Good Captain Pistol; not here, sweet captain.
Captain! thou abominable damned cheater, art thou
Pray thee, go down, good ancient.
Not I	I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could
I'll see her damned first; to Pluto's damned lake,
Down, down, dogs! down, faitors! Have we not
Good Captain Peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i'
These be good humours, indeed! Shall pack-horses
And hollow pamper'd jades of Asia,
Which cannot go but thirty mile a-day,
Compare with Caesars, and with Cannibals,
And Trojan Greeks? nay, rather damn them with
King Cerberus; and let the welkin roar.
Shall we fall foul for toys?
By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.
Be gone, good ancient: this will grow to abrawl anon.
Die men like dogs! give crowns like pins! Have we
O' my word, captain, there's none such here. What
Then feed, and be fat, my fair Calipolis.
Fear we broadsides? no, let the fiend give fire:
Give me some sack: and, sweetheart, lie thou there.
Come we to full points here; and are etceteras nothing?
Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf: what! we have seen
For God's sake, thrust him down stairs: I cannot
Thrust him down stairs! know we not Galloway nags?
Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat
What! shall we have incision? shall we imbrue?
Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!
Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
Untwine the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!
I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.
Here's a goodly tumult! I'll forswear keeping
So; murder, I warrant now. Alas, alas! put up
I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone.
Ah, you whoreson little valiant villain, you!
He you not hurt i' the groin? methought a' made a
Have you turned him out o' doors?
Yea, sir. The rascal's drunk: you have hurt him,
Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! alas, poor ape,
A rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.
Do, an thou darest for thy heart: an thou dost,
I'll canvass thee between a pair of sheets.
Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, Doll.
A rascal bragging slave! the rogue fled from me
I' faith, and thou followedst him like a church.
Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig,
Peace, good Doll! do not speak like a death's-head;
Sirrah, what humour's the prince of?
A good shallow young fellow: a' would have made a
They say Poins has a good wit.
He a good wit? hang him, baboon! his wit's as thick
Why does the prince love him so, then?
Because their legs are both of a bigness, and a'
Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
Let's beat him before his whore.
Look, whether the withered elder hath not his poll
Is it not strange that desire should so many years
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! what
And look, whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not
Thou dost give me flattering busses.
By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
I am old, I am old.
I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young
What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive
Thou'lt forget me when I am gone.
By my troth, thou'lt set me a-weeping, an thou
Ha! a bastard son of the king's? And art not thou
Why, thou globe of sinful continents! what a life
A better than thou: I am a gentleman; thou art a drawer.
Very true, sir; and I come to draw you out by the ears.
O, the Lord preserve thy good grace! by my troth,
Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by this light
How, you fat fool! I scorn you.
My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and
You whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you
God's blessing of your good heart! and so she is,
Yea, and you knew me, as you did when you ran away
No, no, no; not so; I did not think thou wast within hearing.
I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse;
No abuse, Hal, o' mine honour, no abuse.
Not to dispraise me, and call me pantier and
No abuse, Ned, i' the world; honest Ned, none. I
No abuse, Hal: none, Ned, none: no, faith, boys, none.
See now, whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth
The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irrecoverable;
For one of them, she is in hell already, and burns
No, I think thou art not; I think thou art quit for
All victuallers do so; what's a joint of mutton or
His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to the door there, Francis.
The king your father is at Westminster:
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts
Come from the north: and, as I came along,
I met and overtook a dozen captains,
Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,
And asking every one for Sir John Falstaff.
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame,
So idly to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion, like the south
Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night.
Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and
You must away to court, sir, presently;
A dozen captains stay at door for you.
Farewell good wenches: if I be not sent away post,
I will see you again ere I go.
I cannot speak; if my heart be not read to burst,--
Well, fare thee well: I have known thee these
O, run, Doll, run; run, good Doll: come.
Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;
But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters,
And well consider of them; make good speed.
How many thousand of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep,
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
And hush'd with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lull'd with sound of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile
In loathsome beds, and leavest the kingly couch
A watch-case or a common 'larum-bell?
Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast
Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge
And in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them
With deafening clamour in the slippery clouds,
That, with the hurly, death itself awakes?
Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
And in the calmest and most stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? Then happy low, lie down!
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Many good morrows to your majesty!
Why, then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o'er the letters that I sent you?
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom
How foul it is; what rank diseases grow
And with what danger, near the heart of it.
It is but as a body yet distemper'd;
Which to his former strength may be restored
With good advice and little medicine:
My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool'd.
O God! that one might read the book of fate,
And see the revolution of the times
Make mountains level, and the continent,
Weary of solid firmness, melt itself
Into the sea! and, other times, to see
The beachy girdle of the ocean
Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chances mock,
And changes fill the cup of alteration
With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
What perils past, what crosses to ensue,
Would shut the book, and sit him down and die.
Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,
Did feast together, and in two years after
Were they at wars: it is but eight years since
This Percy was the man nearest my soul,
Who like a brother toil'd in my affairs
And laid his love and life under my foot,
Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard
Gave him defiance. But which of you was by--
You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember--
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
Then cheque'd and rated by Northumberland,
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne;'
Though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
But that necessity so bow'd the state
That I and greatness were compell'd to kiss:
Shall break into corruption:' so went on,
And the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men's lives,
Figuring the nature of the times deceased;
The which observed, a man may prophesy,
With a near aim, of the main chance of things
As yet not come to life, which in their seeds
Such things become the hatch and brood of time;
And by the necessary form of this
King Richard might create a perfect guess
That great Northumberland, then false to him,
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness;
Which should not find a ground to root upon,
Then let us meet them like necessities:
And that same word even now cries out on us:
They say the bishop and Northumberland
Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo,
The numbers of the fear'd. Please it your grace
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,
The powers that you already have sent forth
Shall bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more, I have received
A certain instance that Glendower is dead.
Your majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
And these unseason'd hours perforce must add
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.
Come on, come on, come on, sir; give me your hand,
And how doth my cousin, your bedfellow? and your
Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow!
By yea and nay, sir, I dare say my cousin William is
A' must, then, to the inns o' court shortly. I was
You were called 'lusty Shallow' then, cousin.
By the mass, I was called any thing; and I would
There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire,
Will Squele, a Cotswold man; you had not four such
I may say to you, we knew where the bona-robas were
This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?
The same Sir John, the very same. I  see him break
Skogan's head at the court-gate, when a' was a
Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure: death,
By my troth, I was not there.
Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living
Jesu, Jesu, dead! a' drew a good bow; and dead! a'
Thereafter as they be: a score of good ewes may be
Here come two of Sir John Falstaff's men, as I think.
Good morrow, honest gentlemen: I beseech you, which
I am Robert Shallow, sir; a poor esquire of this
What is your good pleasure with me?
My captain, sir, commends him to you; my captain,
Sir John Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by heaven, and
He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good backsword
Sir, pardon; a soldier is better accommodated than
It is well said, in faith, sir; and it is well said
Pardon me, sir; I have heard the word. Phrase call
Look, here comes good Sir John. Give me your good
I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert
Shallow: Master Surecard, as I think?
No, Sir John; it is my cousin Silence, in commission with me.
Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of
Fie! this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you
Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?
Let me see them, I beseech you.
Where's the roll? where's the roll? where's the
I call; let them do so, let them do so. Let me
What think you, Sir John? a good-limbed fellow;
Ha, ha, ha! most excellent, i' faith! Things that
I was pricked well enough before, an you could have
Go to: peace, Mouldy; you shall go. Mouldy, it is
Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside: know you where
Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under: he's like
Thy mother's son! like enough, and thy father's
Do you like him, Sir John?
Shadow will serve for summer; prick him, for we have
Thou art a very ragged wart.
Shall I prick him down, Sir John?
It were superfluous; for his apparel is built upon
Ha, ha, ha! you can do it, sir; you can do it: I
You may: but if he had been a man's tailor, he'ld
I will do my good will, sir; you can have no more.
Well said, good woman's tailor! well said,
I would Wart might have gone, sir.
I would thou wert a man's tailor, that thou mightst
I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is next?
O Lord! good my lord captain,--
What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?
O Lord, sir! I am a diseased man.
A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I caught
Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown; we wilt
Here is two more called than your number, you must
Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry
O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night
No more of that, good Master Shallow, no more of that.
Ha! 'twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?
She never could away with me.
Never, never; she would always say she could not
By the mass, I could anger her to the heart. She
Nay, she must be old; she cannot choose but be old;
Nightwork before I came to Clement's Inn.
Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that
We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.
That we have, that we have, that we have; in faith,
Sir John, we have: our watch-word was 'Hem boys!'
Come, let's to dinner; come, let's to dinner:
Jesus, the days that we have seen! Come, come.
Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend;
I do not care; but rather, because I am unwilling,
And, good master corporal captain, for my old
By my troth, I care not; a man can die but once: we
Well said; thou'rt a good fellow.
Faith, I'll bear no base mind.
Come, sir, which men shall I have?
Sir, a word with you: I have three pound to free
Come, Sir John, which four will you have?
Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble and Shadow.
Mouldy and Bullcalf: for you, Mouldy, stay at home
Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it: I will none of you.
Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong: they are
Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a
Hold, Wart, traverse; thus, thus, thus.
Come, manage me your caliver. So: very well: go
He is not his craft's master; he doth not do it
Clement's Inn--I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's
These fellows will do well, Master Shallow. God
Sir John, the Lord bless you! God prosper your
Go to; I have spoke at a word. God keep you.
On, Bardolph; lead the men away.
As I return, I will fetch off these justices: I do
Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him; and
I'll be sworn a' ne'er saw him but once in the
Tilt-yard; and then he burst his head for crowding
Gaunt he beat his own name; for you might have
Here stand, my lords; and send discoverers forth
To know the numbers of our enemies.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs,
I must acquaint you that I have received
Their cold intent, tenor and substance, thus:
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers
As might hold sortance with his quality,
The which he could not levy; whereupon
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes,
To Scotland: and concludes in hearty prayers
That your attempts may overlive the hazard
And fearful melting of their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
In goodly form comes on the enemy;
And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
The just proportion that we gave them out
Let us sway on and face them in the field.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.
Health and fair greeting from our general,
The prince, Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace:
Unto your grace do I in chief address
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion
Came like itself, in base and abject routs,
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags,
And countenanced by boys and beggary,
I say, if damn'd commotion so appear'd,
In his true, native and most proper shape,
You, reverend father, and these noble lords
Had not been here, to dress the ugly form
With your fair honours. You, lord archbishop,
Whose see is by a civil peace maintained,
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd,
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd,
The dove and very blessed spirit of peace,
Wherefore do you so ill translate ourself
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace,
Into the harsh and boisterous tongue of war;
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances and your tongue divine
To a trumpet and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this? so the question stands.
Briefly to this end: we are all diseased,
And with our surfeiting and wanton hours
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
And we must bleed for it; of which disease
Our late king, Richard, being infected, died.
But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,
I take not on me here as a physician,
Nor do I as an enemy to peace
Troop in the throngs of military men;
But rather show awhile like fearful war,
To diet rank minds sick of happiness
And purge the obstructions which begin to stop
Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.
I have in equal balance justly weigh'd
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
And find our griefs heavier than our offences.
We see which way the stream of time doth run,
And are enforced from our most quiet there
By the rough torrent of occasion;
And have the summary of all our griefs,
When time shall serve, to show in articles;
Which long ere this we offer'd to the king,
And might by no suit gain our audience:
When we are wrong'd and would unfold our griefs,
We are denied access unto his person
Even by those men that most have done us wrong.
The dangers of the days but newly gone,
Whose memory is written on the earth
With yet appearing blood, and the examples
Of every minute's instance, present now,
Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms,
Not to break peace or any branch of it,
But to establish here a peace indeed,
Concurring both in name and quality.
When ever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the king?
What peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you,
That you should seal this lawless bloody book
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine
To brother born an household cruelty,
I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any such redress;
Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before,
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Construe the times to their necessities,
And you shall say indeed, it is the time,
And not the king, that doth you injuries.
Yet for your part, it not appears to me
Either from the king or in the present time
That you should have an inch of any ground
To build a grief on: were you not restored
To all the Duke of Norfolk's signories,
Your noble and right well remember'd father's?
What thing, in honour, had my father lost,
That need to be revived and breathed in me?
The king that loved him, as the state stood then,
Was force perforce compell'd to banish him:
And then that Harry Bolingbroke and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparking through sights of steel
And the loud trumpet blowing them together,
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd
My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
O when the king did throw his warder down,
His own life hung upon the staff he threw;
Then threw he down himself and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.
The Earl of Hereford was reputed then
In England the most valiant gentlemen:
Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled?
But if your father had been victor there,
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry:
For all the country in a general voice
Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on
And bless'd and graced indeed, more than the king.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general
To know your griefs; to tell you from his grace
That he will give you audience; and wherein
It shall appear that your demands are just,
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off
That might so much as think you enemies.
But he hath forced us to compel this offer;
And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Mowbray, you overween to take it so;
This offer comes from mercy, not from fear:
For, lo! within a ken our army lies,
Upon mine honour, all too confident
To give admittance to a thought of fear.
Our battle is more full of names than yours,
Our men more perfect in the use of arms,
Our armour all as strong, our cause the best;
Then reason will our heart should be as good
Say you not then our offer is compell'd.
Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.
That argues but the shame of your offence:
A rotten case abides no handling.
Hath the Prince John a full commission,
In very ample virtue of his father,
To hear and absolutely to determine
Of what conditions we shall stand upon?
That is intended in the general's name:
I muse you make so slight a question.
Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,
For this contains our general grievances:
All members of our cause, both here and hence,
That are insinew'd to this action,
Acquitted by a true substantial form
And present execution of our wills
To us and to our purposes confined,
We come within our awful banks again
And knit our powers to the arm of peace.
This will I show the general. Please you, lords,
In sight of both our battles we may meet;
And either end in peace, which God so frame!
Or to the place of difference call the swords
My lord, we will do so.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not that: if we can make our peace
Upon such large terms and so absolute
As our conditions shall consist upon,
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice and wanton reason
Shall to the king taste of this action;
That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff
And good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord. Note this; the king is weary
Of dainty and such picking grievances:
For he hath found to end one doubt by death
Revives two greater in the heirs of life,
And therefore will he wipe his tables clean
And keep no tell-tale to his memory
That may repeat and history his loss
To new remembrance; for full well he knows
He cannot so precisely weed this land
His foes are so enrooted with his friends
That, plucking to unfix an enemy,
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend:
So that this land, like an offensive wife
That hath enraged him on to offer strokes,
As he is striking, holds his infant up
And hangs resolved correction in the arm
Besides, the king hath wasted all his rods
On late offenders, that he now doth lack
So that his power, like to a fangless lion,
And therefore be assured, my good lord marshal,
If we do now make our atonement well,
Our peace will, like a broken limb united,
Here is return'd my Lord of Westmoreland.
The prince is here at hand: pleaseth your lordship
To meet his grace just distance 'tween our armies.
Your grace of York, in God's name then, set forward.
Before, and greet his grace: my lord, we come.
You are well encounter'd here, my cousin Mowbray:
Good day to you, gentle lord archbishop;
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.
My Lord of York, it better show'd with you
When that your flock, assembled by the bell,
Encircled you to hear with reverence
Your exposition on the holy text
Than now to see you here an iron man,
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
Turning the word to sword and life to death.
That man that sits within a monarch's heart,
And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,
Would he abuse the countenance of the king,
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abrooch
In shadow of such greatness! With you, lord bishop,
It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken
How deep you were within the books of God?
To us the speaker in his parliament;
To us the imagined voice of God himself;
Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven
And our dull workings. O, who shall believe
But you misuse the reverence of your place,
Employ the countenance and grace of heaven,
As a false favourite doth his prince's name,
In deeds dishonourable? You have ta'en up,
Under the counterfeited zeal of God,
The subjects of his substitute, my father,
And both against the peace of heaven and him
I am not here against your father's peace;
But, as I told my lord of Westmoreland,
The time misorder'd doth, in common sense,
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form,
To hold our safety up. I sent your grace
The parcels and particulars of our grief,
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court,
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born;
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charm'd asleep
With grant of our most just and right desires,
And true obedience, of this madness cured,
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
And though we here fall down,
We have supplies to second our attempt:
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them;
And so success of mischief shall be born
And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up
You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow,
To sound the bottom of the after-times.
Pleaseth your grace to answer them directly
How far forth you do like their articles.
I like them all, and do allow them well,
And swear here, by the honour of my blood,
My father's purposes have been mistook,
And some about him have too lavishly
My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress'd;
Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,
Discharge your powers unto their several counties,
As we will ours: and here between the armies
Let's drink together friendly and embrace,
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home
Of our restored love and amity.
I take your princely word for these redresses.
I give it you, and will maintain my word:
And thereupon I drink unto your grace.
Go, captain, and deliver to the army
This news of peace: let them have pay, and part:
I know it will well please them. Hie thee, captain.
To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.
I pledge your grace; and, if you knew what pains
I have bestow'd to breed this present peace,
You would drink freely: but my love to ye
Shall show itself more openly hereafter.
Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season;
For I am, on the sudden, something ill.
Against ill chances men are ever merry;
But heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow
Serves to say thus, 'some good thing comes
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse, if your own rule be true.
The word of peace is render'd: hark, how they shout!
This had been cheerful after victory.
A peace is of the nature of a conquest;
For then both parties nobly are subdued,
And let our army be discharged too.
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains
March, by us, that we may peruse the men
And, ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
I trust, lords, we shall lie to-night together.
Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
Will not go off until they hear you speak.
My lord, our army is dispersed already;
Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses
East, west, north, south; or, like a school broke up,
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings; for the which
I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason:
And you, lord archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
Of capitol treason I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just and honourable?
Will you thus break your faith?
I promised you redress of these same grievances
Whereof you did complain; which, by mine honour,
I will perform with a most Christian care.
But for you, rebels, look to taste the due
Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
Fondly brought here and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums, pursue the scatter'd stray:
God, and not we, hath safely fought to-day.
Some guard these traitors to the block of death,
Treason's true bed and yielder up of breath.
What's your name, sir? of what condition are you,
I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the dale.
Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is your
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?
As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do ye
I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that
I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of
The heat is past; follow no further now:
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When every thing is ended, then you come:
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
One time or other break some gallows' back.
I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus: I
But what of that? he saw me, and yielded; that I
It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.
I know not: here he is, and here I yield him: and
I beseech your grace, let it be booked with the
Let it do something, my good lord, that may do me
A famous rebel art thou, Colevile.
And a famous true subject took him.
I am, my lord, but as my betters are
That led me hither: had they been ruled by me,
You should have won them dearer than you have.
I know not how they sold themselves: but thou, like
Retreat is made and execution stay'd.
Blunt, lead him hence; and see you guard him sure.
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords:
I hear the king my father is sore sick:
Our news shall go before us to his majesty,
Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him,
And we with sober speed will follow you.
My lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go
Through Gloucestershire: and, when you come to court,
Stand my good lord, pray, in your good report.
Fare you well, Falstaff: I, in my condition,
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.
I would you had but the wit: 'twere better than
There's never none of these demure boys come to any
Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is valiant; for
I had a thousand sons, the first humane principle I
The army is discharged all and gone.
Let them go. I'll through Gloucestershire; and
I have him already tempering between my finger and
Now, lords, if God doth give successful end
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,
We will our youth lead on to higher fields
And draw no swords but what are sanctified.
Our navy is address'd, our power collected,
Our substitutes in absence well invested,
And every thing lies level to our wish:
Only, we want a little personal strength;
And pause us, till these rebels, now afoot,
Come underneath the yoke of government.
Both which we doubt not but your majesty
Where is the prince your brother?
I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.
I do not know, my lord.
Is not his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?
No, my good lord; he is in presence here.
What would my lord and father?
Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother?
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas;
Thou hast a better place in his affection
Than all thy brothers: cherish it, my boy,
And noble offices thou mayst effect
Of mediation, after I am dead,
Between his greatness and thy other brethren:
Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love,
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace
By seeming cold or careless of his will;
For he is gracious, if he be observed:
He hath a tear for pity and a hand
Open as day for melting charity:
Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he's flint,
As humorous as winter and as sudden
As flaws congealed in the spring of day.
His temper, therefore, must be well observed:
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,
When thou perceive his blood inclined to mirth;
But, being moody, give him line and scope,
Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,
Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas,
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,
That the united vessel of their blood,
As, force perforce, the age will pour it in--
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong
I shall observe him with all care and love.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?
He is not there to-day; he dines in London.
And how accompanied? canst thou tell that?
With Poins, and other his continual followers.
Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds;
And he, the noble image of my youth,
Is overspread with them: therefore my grief
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death:
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape
In forms imaginary the unguided days
And rotten times that you shall look upon
When I am sleeping with my ancestors.
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,
When rage and hot blood are his counsellors,
When means and lavish manners meet together,
O, with what wings shall his affections fly
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!
My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite:
The prince but studies his companions
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,
Be look'd upon and learn'd; which once attain'd,
Your highness knows, comes to no further use
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,
The prince will in the perfectness of time
Cast off his followers; and their memory
Shall as a pattern or a measure live,
By which his grace must mete the lives of others,
Health to my sovereign, and new happiness
Added to that that I am to deliver!
Prince John your son doth kiss your grace's hand:
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings and all
Are brought to the correction of your law;
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheath'd
But peace puts forth her olive every where.
The manner how this action hath been borne
Here at more leisure may your highness read,
With every course in his particular.
O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,
Which ever in the haunch of winter sings
From enemies heaven keep your majesty;
And, when they stand against you, may they fall
As those that I am come to tell you of!
The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,
With a great power of English and of Scots
Are by the sheriff of Yorkshire overthrown:
The manner and true order of the fight
This packet, please it you, contains at large.
And wherefore should these good news make me sick?
Will fortune never come with both hands full,
But write her fair words still in foulest letters?
She either gives a stomach and no food;
Such are the poor, in health; or else a feast
And takes away the stomach; such are the rich,
That have abundance and enjoy it not.
I should rejoice now at this happy news;
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy:
O me! come near me; now I am much ill.
My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
Be patient, princes; you do know, these fits
Are with his highness very ordinary.
Stand from him. Give him air; he'll straight be well.
No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs:
The incessant care and labour of his mind
Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in
So thin that life looks through and will break out.
The people fear me; for they do observe
Unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature:
The seasons change their manners, as the year
Had found some months asleep and leap'd them over.
The river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between;
And the old folk, time's doting chronicles,
Say it did so a little time before
That our great-grandsire, Edward, sick'd and died.
Speak lower, princes, for the king recovers.
This apoplexy will certain be his end.
I pray you, take me up, and bear me hence
Into some other chamber: softly, pray.
Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends;
Unless some dull and favourable hand
Will whisper music to my weary spirit.
Call for the music in the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and he changes much.
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
I am here, brother, full of heaviness.
How now! rain within doors, and none abroad!
Heard he the good news yet?
He alter'd much upon the hearing it.
If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.
Not so much noise, my lords: sweet prince,
The king your father is disposed to sleep.
Let us withdraw into the other room.
Will't please your grace to go along with us?
No; I will sit and watch here by the king.
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night! sleep with it now!
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
That scalds with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not:
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down
Perforce must move. My gracious lord! my father!
This sleep is sound indeed, this is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorced
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood,
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness,
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously:
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate as thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me. Lo, here it sits,
Which God shall guard: and put the world's whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force
This lineal honour from me: this from thee
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
What would your majesty? How fares your grace?
Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
We left the prince my brother here, my liege,
Who undertook to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales! Where is he? let me see him:
This door is open; he is gone this way.
He came not through the chamber where we stay'd.
Where is the crown? who took it from my pillow?
When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
The prince hath ta'en it hence: go, seek him out.
Is he so hasty that he doth suppose
Find him, my Lord of Warwick; chide him hither.
This part of his conjoins with my disease,
And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are!
How quickly nature falls into revolt
For this the foolish over-careful fathers
Have broke their sleep with thoughts, their brains with care,
For this they have engrossed and piled up
The canker'd heaps of strange-achieved gold;
For this they have been thoughtful to invest
Their sons with arts and martial exercises:
When, like the bee, culling from every flower
Our thighs pack'd with wax, our mouths with honey,
We bring it to the hive, and, like the bees,
Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste
Yield his engrossments to the ending father.
Now, where is he that will not stay so long
Till his friend sickness hath determined me?
My lord, I found the prince in the next room,
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,
With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow
That tyranny, which never quaff'd but blood,
Would, by beholding him, have wash'd his knife
With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.
But wherefore did he take away the crown?
Lo, where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry.
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.
I never thought to hear you speak again.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought:
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth!
Thou seek'st the greatness that will o'erwhelm thee.
Stay but a little; for my cloud of dignity
Is held from falling with so weak a wind
That it will quickly drop: my day is dim.
Thou hast stolen that which after some few hours
Were thine without offence; and at my death
Thou hast seal'd up my expectation:
Thy life did manifest thou lovedst me not,
And thou wilt have me die assured of it.
Thou hidest a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,
Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,
To stab at half an hour of my life.
What! canst thou not forbear me half an hour?
Then get thee gone and dig my grave thyself,
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head:
Only compound me with forgotten dust
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees;
For now a time is come to mock at form:
Harry the Fifth is crown'd: up, vanity!
Down, royal state! all you sage counsellors, hence!
And to the English court assemble now,
From every region, apes of idleness!
Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum:
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?
Be happy, he will trouble you no more;
England shall double gild his treble guilt,
England shall give him office, honour, might;
For the fifth Harry from curb'd licence plucks
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.
O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!
When that my care could not withhold thy riots,
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?
O, thou wilt be a wilderness again,
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants!
O, pardon me, my liege! but for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown;
And He that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours! If I affect it more
Than as your honour and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit
Teacheth, this prostrate and exterior bending.
God witness with me, when I here came in,
And found no course of breath within your majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,
O, let me in my present wildness die
And never live to show the incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed!
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead,
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were,
I spake unto this crown as having sense,
And thus upbraided it: 'The care on thee depending
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore, thou best of gold art worst of gold:
Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
But thou, most fine, most honour'd: most renown'd,
Hast eat thy bearer up.' Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it, as with an enemy
That had before my face murder'd my father,
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride;
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head
And make me as the poorest vassal is
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!
God put it in thy mind to take it hence,
That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,
Pleading so wisely in excuse of it!
Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed;
And hear, I think, the very latest counsel
That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son,
By what by-paths and indirect crook'd ways
I met this crown; and I myself know well
How troublesome it sat upon my head.
To thee it shall descend with bitter quiet,
For all the soil of the achievement goes
With me into the earth. It seem'd in me
But as an honour snatch'd with boisterous hand,
And I had many living to upbraid
My gain of it by their assistances;
Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,
Wounding supposed peace: all these bold fears
Thou see'st with peril I have answered;
For all my reign hath been but as a scene
Acting that argument: and now my death
Changes the mode; for what in me was purchased,
Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort;
So thou the garland wear'st successively.
Yet, though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,
Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green;
And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends,
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out;
By whose fell working I was first advanced
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear
To be again displaced: which to avoid,
I cut them off; and had a purpose now
To lead out many to the Holy Land,
Lest rest and lying still might make them look
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds
With foreign quarrels; that action, hence borne out,
May waste the memory of the former days.
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so
That strength of speech is utterly denied me.
How I came by the crown, O God forgive;
And grant it may with thee in true peace live!
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
Then plain and right must my possession be:
Which I with more than with a common pain
Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.
Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father!
Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John;
But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown
From this bare wither'd trunk: upon thy sight
My worldly business makes a period.
Where is my Lord of Warwick?
Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?
Laud be to God! even there my life must end.
It hath been prophesied to me many years,
I should not die but in Jerusalem;
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land:
But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie;
In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night.
You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you; you shall not be excused;
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy; let me
Marry, sir, thus; those precepts cannot be served:
With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook: are
Yes, sir. Here is now the smith's note for shoeing
Let it be cast and paid. Sir John, you shall not be excused.
Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must need be
A' shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple
Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
Yea, Davy. I will use him well: a friend i' the
No worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they
Well conceited, Davy: about thy business, Davy.
I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor of
Woncot against Clement Perkes of the hill.
There is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor:
I grant your worship that he is a knave, sir; but
Go to; I say he shall have no wrong. Look about, Davy.
Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off
I am glad to see your worship.
I thank thee with all my heart, kind
Master Bardolph: and welcome, my tall fellow.
I'll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.
If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four
Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to see the
I come, Master Shallow; I come, Master Shallow.
How now, my lord chief-justice! whither away?
Lord Chief-Justice	How doth the king?
Exceeding well; his cares are now all ended.
Lord Chief-Justice	I hope, not dead.
He's walk'd the way of nature;
And to our purposes he lives no more.
Lord Chief-Justice	I would his majesty had call'd me with him:
The service that I truly did his life
Hath left me open to all injuries.
Indeed I think the young king loves you not.
Lord Chief-Justice	I know he doth not, and do arm myself
To welcome the condition of the time,
Which cannot look more hideously upon me
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry:
O that the living Harry had the temper
Of him, the worst of these three gentlemen!
How many nobles then should hold their places
That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
Lord Chief-Justice	O God, I fear all will be overturn'd!
Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.
We do remember; but our argument
Is all too heavy to admit much talk.
Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.
Lord Chief-Justice	Peace be with us, lest we be heavier!
O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed;
And I dare swear you borrow not that face
Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.
Though no man be assured what grace to find,
I am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.
Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair;
Which swims against your stream of quality.
Lord Chief-Justice	Sweet princes, what I did, I did in honour,
Led by the impartial conduct of my soul:
And never shall you see that I will beg
If truth and upright innocency fail me,
I'll to the king my master that is dead,
And tell him who hath sent me after him.
Lord Chief-Justice	Good morrow; and God save your majesty!
This new and gorgeous garment, majesty,
Sits not so easy on me as you think.
Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear:
This is the English, not the Turkish court;
But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,
For, by my faith, it very well becomes you:
Sorrow so royally in you appears
That I will deeply put the fashion on
And wear it in my heart: why then, be sad;
But entertain no more of it, good brothers,
Than a joint burden laid upon us all.
For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured,
I'll be your father and your brother too;
Let me but bear your love, I 'll bear your cares:
Yet weep that Harry's dead; and so will I;
But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears
By number into hours of happiness.
We hope no other from your majesty.
You all look strangely on me: and you most;
You are, I think, assured I love you not.
Lord Chief-Justice	I am assured, if I be measured rightly,
Your majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
How might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What! rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison
The immediate heir of England! Was this easy?
May this be wash'd in Lethe, and forgotten?
Lord Chief-Justice	I then did use the person of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me:
And, in the administration of his law,
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the king whom I presented,
And struck me in my very seat of judgment;
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
I gave bold way to my authority
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Be you contented, wearing now the garland,
To have a son set your decrees at nought,
To pluck down justice from your awful bench,
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword
That guards the peace and safety of your person;
Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image
And mock your workings in a second body.
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;
Be now the father and propose a son,
Hear your own dignity so much profaned,
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,
Behold yourself so by a son disdain'd;
And then imagine me taking your part
And in your power soft silencing your son:
After this cold considerance, sentence me;
And, as you are a king, speak in your state
What I have done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right, justice, and you weigh this well;
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword:
And I do wish your honours may increase,
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you and obey you, as I did.
So shall I live to speak my father's words:
That dares do justice on my proper son;
And not less happy, having such a son,
That would deliver up his greatness so
Into the hands of justice.' You did commit me:
For which, I do commit into your hand
The unstained sword that you have used to bear;
With this remembrance, that you use the same
With the like bold, just and impartial spirit
As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to my youth:
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear,
And I will stoop and humble my intents
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you;
My father is gone wild into his grave,
For in his tomb lie my affections;
And with his spirit sadly I survive,
To mock the expectation of the world,
To frustrate prophecies and to raze out
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me
Hath proudly flow'd in vanity till now:
Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods
And flow henceforth in formal majesty.
Now call we our high court of parliament:
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best govern'd nation;
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us;
In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.
Our coronation done, we will accite,
As I before remember'd, all our state:
And, God consigning to my good intents,
No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,
God shorten Harry's happy life one day!
Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour,
Barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all,
Sir John: marry, good air. Spread, Davy; spread,
This Davy serves you for good uses; he is your
A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet,
Sir John: by the mass, I have drunk too much sack
Do nothing but eat, and make good cheer,
And praise God for the merry year;
When flesh is cheap and females dear,
And lusty lads roam here and there
There's a merry heart! Good Master Silence, I'll
Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.
Sweet sir, sit; I'll be with you anon. most sweet
Proface! What you want in meat, we'll have in drink:
Be merry, Master Bardolph; and, my little soldier
Be merry, be merry, my wife has all;
For women are shrews, both short and tall:
I did not think Master Silence had been a man of
Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.
There's a dish of leather-coats for you.
Your worship! I'll be with you straight.
A cup of wine that's brisk and fine,
And drink unto the leman mine;
And a merry heart lives long-a.
An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o' the night.
Health and long life to you, Master Silence.
Fill the cup, and let it come;
I'll pledge you a mile to the bottom.
Honest Bardolph, welcome: if thou wantest any
And welcome indeed too. I'll drink to Master
Bardolph, and to all the cavaleros about London.
I hove to see London once ere I die.
An I might see you there, Davy,--
By the mass, you'll crack a quart together, ha!
By God's liggens, I thank thee: the knave will
And I'll stick by him, sir.
Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing: be merry.
Look who's at door there, ho! who knocks?
Why, now you have done me right.
Is't so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.
An't please your worship, there's one Pistol come
From the court! let him come in.
What wind blew you hither, Pistol?
Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet
By'r lady, I think a' be, but goodman Puff of Barson.
Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee,
And tidings do I bring and lucky joys
And golden times and happy news of price.
I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.
A foutre for the world and worldlings base!
I speak of Africa and golden joys.
O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?
Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.
And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?
And shall good news be baffled?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.
Give me pardon, sir: if, sir, you come with news
Under which king, Besonian? speak, or die.
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king;
Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth:
When Pistol lies, do this; and fig me, like
What, is the old king dead?
As nail in door: the things I speak are just.
Away, Bardolph! saddle my horse. Master Robert
Shallow, choose what office thou wilt in the land,
I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.
What! I do bring good news.
Carry Master Silence to bed. Master Shallow, my
Lord Shallow,--be what thou wilt; I am fortune's
Come, Pistol, utter more to me; and withal devise
Shallow: I know the young king is sick for me. Let
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!
No, thou arrant knave; I would to God that I might
The constables have delivered her over to me; and
Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on; I 'll tell
O the Lord, that Sir John were come! he would make
If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again;
I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I
Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.
O God, that right should thus overcome might!
Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.
Come, you thin thing; come you rascal.
Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow; I will
God bless thy lungs, good knight.
Come here, Pistol; stand behind me. O, if I had had
It shows my earnestness of affection,--
It doth, it doth, it doth.
As it were, to ride day and night; and not to
But to stand stained with travel, and sweating with
My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver,
Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in base durance and contagious prison;
By most mechanical and dirty hand:
Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell
For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.
There roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
God save thy grace, King Hal! my royal Hal!
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
God save thee, my sweet boy!
My lord chief-justice, speak to that vain man.
Lord Chief-Justice	Have you your wits? know you what 'tis to speak?
My king! my Jove! I speak to thee, my heart!
I know thee not, old man: fall to thy prayers;
How ill white hairs become a fool and jester!
I have long dream'd of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swell'd, so old and so profane;
But, being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace;
Leave gormandizing; know the grave doth gape
For thee thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest:
Presume not that I am the thing I was;
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turn'd away my former self;
So will I those that kept me company.
When thou dost hear I am as I have been,
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,
The tutor and the feeder of my riots:
Till then, I banish thee, on pain of death,
As I have done the rest of my misleaders,
Not to come near our person by ten mile.
For competence of life I will allow you,
That lack of means enforce you not to evil:
And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,
We will, according to your strengths and qualities,
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,
To see perform'd the tenor of our word. Set on.
Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.
Yea, marry, Sir John; which I beseech you to let me
That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not you
I cannot well perceive how, unless you should give
Sir, I will be as good as my word: this that you
A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John.
Fear no colours: go  with me to dinner: come,
Lieutenant Pistol; come, Bardolph: I shall be sent
Lord Chief-Justice	Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet:
Take all his company along with him.
Lord Chief-Justice	I cannot now speak: I will hear you soon.
Si fortune me tormenta, spero contenta.
I like this fair proceeding of the king's:
He hath intent his wonted followers
Shall all be very well provided for;
But all are banish'd till their conversations
Appear more wise and modest to the world.
Lord Chief-Justice	And so they are.
The king hath call'd his parliament, my lord.
I will lay odds that, ere this year expire,
We bear our civil swords and native fire
As far as France: I beard a bird so sing,
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the king.
First my fear; then my courtesy; last my speech.
My fear is, your displeasure; my courtesy, my duty;
But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it
I would be and here I commit my body to your
If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will
One word more, I beseech you. If you be not too
