[Kneeling]  Long live Queen Margaret, England's
[Reads]  'Imprimis, it is agreed between the French
king Charles, and William de la Pole, Marquess of
Suffolk, ambassador for Henry King of England, that
the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret,
daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia and
Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England ere the
thirtieth of May next ensuing. Item, that the duchy
of Anjou and the county of Maine shall be released
and delivered to the king her father'--
[Reads]  'Item, It is further agreed between them,
that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be
released and delivered over to the king her father,
and she sent over of the King of England's own
proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.'
My masters, let's stand close: my lord protector
will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver
Come back, fool; this is the Duke of Suffolk, and
I pray, my lord, pardon me; I took ye for my lord
[Reading]  'To my Lord Protector!' Are your
supplications to his lordship? Let me see them:
Mine is, an't please your grace, against John
Goodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping my
house, and lands, and wife and all, from me.
Thy wife, too! that's some wrong, indeed. What's
'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the
commons of Melford.' How now, sir knave!
[Giving his petition]  Against my master, Thomas
Horner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightful
What sayst thou? did the Duke of York say he was
That my master was? no, forsooth: my master said
that he was, and that the king was an usurper.
Take this fellow in, and send for
his master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hear
more of your matter before the King.
An't shall please your majesty, I never said nor
thought any such matter: God is my witness, I am
By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them to
me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my
Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words.
My accuser is my 'prentice; and when I did correct
him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his
knees he would be even with me: I have good
witness of this: therefore I beseech your majesty,
do not cast away an honest man for a villain's
Alas, my lord, I cannot fight; for God's sake, pity
my case. The spite of man prevaileth against me. O
Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to
fight a blow. O Lord, my heart!
Away with them to prison; and the day of combat
shall be the last of the next month. Come,
Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
Come, my masters; the duchess, I tell you, expects
Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her
ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
I have heard her reported to be a woman of an
invincible spirit: but it shall be convenient,
Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while we be
busy below; and so, I pray you, go, in God's name,
prostrate and grovel on the earth; John Southwell,
read you; and let us to our work.
Well said, my masters; and welcome all. To this
[Aside to CARDINAL]  Make up no factious
In thine own person answer thy abuse.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Ay, where thou darest
not peep: an if thou darest,
This evening, on the east side of the grove.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  Are ye advised? the
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have
Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldst
Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in
Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou
mightest as well have known all our names as thus to
name the several colours we do wear. Sight may
distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them
all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here
hath done a miracle; and would ye not think his
cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple
My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles in
your town, and things called whips?
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,
if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap me
over this stool and run away.
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrah
beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah; off with your
Let them be whipped through every market-town, till
they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of
sack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.
And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour:
drink, and fear not your man.
Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all; and
First 'Prentice	Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.
Second 'Prentice	Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray
you; for I think I have taken my last draught in
this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee
my apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer:
and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O
Lord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able to
deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's
instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an
honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will
take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the
king, nor the queen: and therefore, Peter, have at
Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and the
good wine in thy master's way.
How fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to
And so am I; my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now! why start'st thou? what, doth
Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath;
they have been up these two days.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it
was never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
True; and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation;
which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be
labouring men; and therefore should we be
Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of a
brave mind than a hard hand.
I see them! I see them! there's Best's son, the
He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with
the spirit of putting down kings and princes,
[Aside]  He was an honest man, and a good
[Aside]  She was, indeed, a pedler's daughter, and
[Aside]  But now of late, notable to travel with her
furred pack, she washes bucks here at home.
[Aside]  Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable;
and there was he borne, under a hedge, for his
father had never a house but the cage.
[Aside]  No question of that; for I have seen him
[Aside]  But methinks he should stand in fear of
fire, being burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep.
Be brave, then; for your captain is brave, and vows
reformation. There shall be in England seven
halfpenny loaves sold for a penny: the three-hooped
pot; shall have ten hoops and I will make it felony
to drink small beer: all the realm shall be in
common; and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to
grass: and when I am king, as king I will be,--
I thank you, good people: there shall be no money;
all shall eat and drink on my score; and I will
apparel them all in one livery, that they may agree
like brothers and worship me their lord.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable
thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should
be made parchment? that parchment, being scribbled
o'er, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings:
but I say, 'tis the bee's wax; for I did but seal
once to a thing, and I was never mine own man
The clerk of Chatham: he can write and read and
I am sorry for't: the man is a proper man, of mine
honour; unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.
Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee: what is thy name?
They use to write it on the top of letters: 'twill
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? or
hast thou a mark to thyself, like an honest
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up
that I can write my name.
He hath confessed: away with him! he's a villain
Away with him, I say! hang him with his pen and
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his
brother are hard by, with the king's forces.
Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He
shall be encountered with a man as good as himself:
he is but a knight, is a'?
Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and
the bricks are alive at this day to testify it;
[Aside]  He lies, for I invented it myself.
Go to, sirrah, tell the king from me, that, for his
father's sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys
went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content
he shall reign; but I'll be protector over him.
And furthermore, well have the Lord Say's head for
And good reason; for thereby is England mained, and
fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds
it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say
hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch:
and more than that, he can speak French; and
Nay, answer, if you can: the Frenchmen are our
enemies; go to, then, I ask but this: can he that
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
But then are we in order when we are most
out of order. Come, march forward.
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou
behavedst thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own
slaughter-house: therefore thus will I reward thee,
the Lent shall be as long again as it is; and thou
shalt have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This
monument of the victory will I bear;
and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse' heels
till I do come to London, where we will have the
If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the
gaols and let out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march
What answer makes your grace to the rebels'
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have
won the bridge, killing all those that withstand
them: the lord mayor craves aid of your honour from
the Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting
upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the
city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but
claret wine this first year of our reign. And now
henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls
Come, then, let's go fight with them; but first, go
and set London bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn
down the Tower too. Come, let's away.
So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy;
others to the inns of court; down with them all.
[Aside]  Mass, 'twill be sore law, then; for he was
thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole
[Aside]  Nay, John, it will be stinking law for his
breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn
all the records of the realm: my mouth shall be
[Aside]  Then we are like to have biting statutes,
unless his teeth be pulled out.
My lord, a prize, a prize! here's the Lord Say,
which sold the towns in France; he that made us pay
one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah,
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! now
art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction
regal. What canst thou answer to my majesty for
giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the
dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these
presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I
am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such
filth as thou art. Thou hast most traitorously
corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers
had no other books but the score and the tally, thou
hast caused printing to be used, and, contrary to
the king, his crown and dignity, thou hast built a
paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou
hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and
a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian
ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed
justices of peace, to call poor men before them
about matters they were not able to answer.
Moreover, thou hast put them in prison; and because
they could not read, thou hast hanged them; when,
indeed, only for that cause they have been most
worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a
cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose
And work in their shirt too; as myself, for example,
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, I'll be even
with you: I'll see if his head will stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead him.
[Aside]  I feel remorse in myself with his words;
but I'll bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for
pleading so well for his life. Away with him! he
has a familiar under his tongue; he speaks not o'
God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
off his head presently; and then break into his
son-in-law's house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off
his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.
Away with him! and do as I command ye.
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there
shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me
her maidenhead ere they have it: men shall hold of
me in capite; and we charge and command that their
wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,
for they loved well when they were alive. Now part
them again, lest they consult about the giving up of
some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the
spoil of the city until night: for with these borne
before us, instead of maces, will we ride through
the streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!
Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill
and knock down! throw them into Thames!
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to
sound retreat or parley, when I command them kill?
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? And
you, base peasants, do ye believe him? will you
needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks?
Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates,
that you should leave me at the White Hart in
Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out
these arms till you had recovered your ancient
freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards,
and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let
them break your backs with burthens, take your
houses over your heads, ravish your wives and
daughters before your faces: for me, I will make
shift for one; and so, God's curse light upon you
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them
to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me
desolate. I see them lay their heads together to
surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is
no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have
through the very middest of you? and heavens and
honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me.
but only my followers' base and ignominious
treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
Fie on ambition! fie on myself, that have a sword,
and yet am ready to famish! These five days have I
hid me in these woods and durst not peep out, for
all the country is laid for me; but now am I so
hungry that if I might have a lease of my life for a
thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore,
on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to
see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another
while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach
this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a
sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown
bill; and many a time, when I have been dry and
bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a
quart pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet'
must serve me to feed on.
Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a
stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand
crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but
I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow
my sword like a great pin, ere thou and I part.
Brave thee! ay, by the best blood that ever was
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I
have eat no meat these five days; yet, come thou and
thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead
as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I
heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out
the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou
O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain me:
let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me
but the ten meals I have lost, and I'll defy them
all. Wither, garden; and be henceforth a
burying-place to all that do dwell in this house,
because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort
all the world to be cowards; for I, that never
feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
