In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.
And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death
You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you,
What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
He hath abandoned his physicians, madam; under whose
This young gentlewoman had a father,--O, that
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was
He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key: be cheque'd for silence,
But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord;
Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit of
O, were that all! I think not on my father;
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him: my imagination
Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though plague,
To see him every hour; to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart's table; heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?
One that goes with him: I love him for his sake;
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when virtue's steely bones
Look bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let me
But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant,
There is none: man, sitting down before you, will
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a virgin.
There's little can be said in 't; 'tis against the
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out
Not my virginity yet [         ]
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother and a mistress and a friend,
A phoenix, captain and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The court's a learning place, and he is one--
That I wish well. 'Tis pity--
That wishing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, I
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
The wars have so kept you under that you must needs
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
You go so much backward when you fight.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety;
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be: who ever strove
So show her merit, that did miss her love?
The king's disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears;
Have fought with equal fortune and continue
Nay, 'tis most credible; we here received it
A certainty, vouch'd from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business and would seem
Approved so to your majesty, may plead
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your majesty's.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership! He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long;
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
To-day in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour;
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honour,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obey'd his hand: who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them,
To grow there and to bear,--'Let me not live,'--
This his good melancholy oft began,
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out,--'Let me not live,' quoth he,
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
Expire before their fashions.' This he wish'd;
I after him do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
Some six months since, my lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm; the rest have worn me out
With several applications; nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count;
I will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah:
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
I do beg your good will in this case.
In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven on
Is this all your worship's reason?
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons such as they
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
I am out o' friends, madam; and I hope to have
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.
You're shallow, madam, in great friends; for the
He that ears my land spares my team and gives me
Papist, howsome'er their hearts are severed in
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next
For I the ballad will repeat,
Which men full true shall find;
Get you gone, sir; I'll talk with you more anon.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her;
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
With that she sighed as she stood,
With that she sighed as she stood,
Among nine bad if one be good,
Among nine bad if one be good,
There's yet one good in ten.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
One good woman in ten, madam; which is a purifying
You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you.
That man should be at woman's command, and yet no
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me; and
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think
Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put
This she delivered in the most bitter touch of
You have discharged this honestly; keep it to
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you,
Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are nature's, these are ours; this thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth:
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.
I am a mother to you.
Why not a mother? When I said 'a mother,'
Methought you saw a serpent: what's in 'mother,'
That you start at it? I say, I am your mother;
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine: 'tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care:
God's mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
That this distemper'd messenger of wet,
The many-colour'd Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? that you are my daughter?
I say, I am your mother.
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honour'd name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble:
My master, my dear lord he is; and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.
You are my mother, madam; would you were,--
So that my lord your son were not my brother,--
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Can't no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law:
God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catch'd your fondness: now I see
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Your salt tears' head: now to all sense 'tis gross
You love my son; invention is ashamed,
Against the proclamation of thy passion,
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true;
But tell me then, 'tis so; for, look thy cheeks
Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it: only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, is't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about; my love hath in't a bond,
Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose
The state of your affection; for your passions
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
My friends were poor, but honest; so's my love:
Be not offended; for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me: I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit;
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do: but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity
To her, whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!
Had you not lately an intent,--speak truly,--
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
For general sovereignty; and that he will'd me
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note: amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris and the medicine and the king
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? he and his physicians
Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him,
They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowell'd of their doctrine, have left off
More than my father's skill, which was the greatest
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your honour
But give me leave to try success, I'ld venture
The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure
By such a day and hour.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court: I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt:
Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles
Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell:
Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain, all
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received,
After well enter'd soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords;
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy,--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy,--see that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it; when
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.
Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them:
They say, our French lack language to deny,
If they demand: beware of being captives,
O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
Most admirable: I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with
An thy mind stand to't, boy, steal away bravely.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up and no sword worn
But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.
I am your accessary; and so, farewell.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good
Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here
Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?
Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.
I'll fee thee to stand up.
Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
Good faith, across: but, my good lord 'tis thus;
Will you be cured of your infirmity?
O, will you eat no grapes, my royal fox?
Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With spritely fire and motion; whose simple touch,
Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand,
And write to her a love-line.
Why, Doctor She: my lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her: now, by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that, in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.
Bring in the admiration; that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondering how thou took'st it.
And not be all day neither.
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
This is his majesty; say your mind to him:
A traitor you do look like; but such traitors
His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressid's uncle,
That dare leave two together; fare you well.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
Gerard de Narbon was my father;
In what he did profess, well found.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him:
Knowing him is enough. On's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.
Which, as the dearest issue of his practise,
And of his old experience the oily darling,
He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear; I have so;
And hearing your high majesty is touch'd
With that malignant cause wherein the honour
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
That labouring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate; I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
I will no more enforce mine office on you.
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one, to bear me back again.
I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful:
Thou thought'st to help me; and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live:
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister:
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
When judges have been babes; great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the greatest been denied.
Oft expectation fails and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.
I must not hear thee; fare thee well, kind maid;
Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid:
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barr'd:
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim;
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.
Are thou so confident? within what space
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free and sickness freely die.
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame
Traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name
With vilest torture let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak:
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear; for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate,
That happiness and prime can happy call:
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved: not helping, death's my fee;
But, if I help, what do you promise me?
But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand; the premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust,
From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.
Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I
To the court! why, what place make you special,
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he
Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks,
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in
O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off. More,
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord,
I play the noble housewife with the time
To entertain't so merrily with a fool.
O Lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.
An end, sir; to your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back:
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son:
Not much employment for you: you understand me?
Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.
They say miracles are past; and we have our
Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
To be relinquish'd of the artists,--
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,--
Why, there 'tis; so say I too.
Right; as 'twere, a man assured of a--
Just, you say well; so would I have said.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
That's it; I would have said the very same.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me,
Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is the
I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.
Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid the
Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen?
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side;
And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense
Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Fair maid, send forth thine eye: this youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use: thy frank election make;
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!
I'ld give bay Curtal and his furniture,
My mouth no more were broken than these boys',
Not one of those but had a noble father.
Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest,
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it your majesty, I have done already:
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever;
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream. Sir, will you hear my suit?
Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace
The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threateningly replies:
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes and her humble love!
Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,
I'd have them whipped; or I would send them to the
Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
I'll never do you wrong for your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have her:
You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunk
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. This is the man.
Why, then, young Bertram, take her; she's thy wife.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
What she has done for me?
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest,
A poor physician's daughter, thou dislikest
Of virtue for the name: but do not so:
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doer's deed:
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Is good without a name. Vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honour: that is honour's scorn,
Which challenges itself as honour's born
And is not like the sire: honours thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers: the mere word's a slave
Debosh'd on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb
Of honour'd bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest: virtue and she
Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do't.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad:
My honour's at the stake; which to defeat,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift;
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream,
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know,
It is in us to plant thine honour where
We please to have it grow. Cheque thy contempt:
Obey our will, which travails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims;
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak; thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes: when I consider
What great creation and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the king; who, so ennobled,
And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate
Good fortune and the favour of the king
Smile upon this contract; whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
And be perform'd to-night: the solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lovest her,
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
Your lord and master did well to make his
Ay; is it not a language I speak?
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without
Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
To any count, to all counts, to what is man.
To what is count's man: count's master is of
You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee,--
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.
I have not, my lord, deserved it.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it; and I will not
Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off
I'll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with
Sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's news
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make
The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a
Good, very good; it is so then: good, very good;
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
The tread of a man's foot: to the wars!
There's letters from my mother: what the import is,
Ay, that would be known. To the wars, my boy, to the wars!
He wears his honour in a box unseen,
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions
France is a stable; we that dwell in't jades;
It shall be so: I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the king
That which I durst not speak; his present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields,
Where noble fellows strike: war is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.
Will this capriccio hold in thee? art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll send her straight away: to-morrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard:
A young man married is a man that's marr'd:
Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go:
The king has done you wrong: but, hush, 'tis so.
My mother greets me kindly; is she well?
She is not well; but yet she has her health: she's
If she be very well, what does she ail, that she's
Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own
You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money,
I would she did as you say.
Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou'rt a
Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you
A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away to-night;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
But puts it off to a compell'd restraint;
Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with sweets,
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
That you will take your instant leave o' the king
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthen'd with what apology you think
That, having this obtain'd, you presently
In every thing I wait upon his will.
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
I have then sinned against his experience and
Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?
O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, 's a good
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses; and to-night,
When I should take possession of the bride,
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lord's
You have made shift to run into 't, boots and spurs
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
I have spoken better of you than you have or will to
Why, do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the king and have procured his leave
For present parting; only he desires
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you
That presently you take our way for home;
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better than they seem
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother:
I leave you to your wisdom.
But that I am your most obedient servant.
Come, come, no more of that.
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd
My haste is very great: farewell; hie home.
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is;
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.
Something; and scarce so much: nothing, indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord:
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur? Farewell.
Go thou toward home; where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
Upon your grace's part; black and fearful
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion: therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
And all the honours that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well;
When better fall, for your avails they fell:
It hath happened all as I would have had it, save
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
By what observance, I pray you?
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court: our
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy.
To fly the favours of so good a king;
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprising of a maid too virtuous
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two
Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does:
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief,
That the first face of neither, on the start,
Can woman me unto't: where is my son, I pray you?
Madam, he's gone to serve the duke of Florence:
We met him thitherward; for thence we came,
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
When thou canst get the ring upon my finger which
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pain.
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer;
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety: he was my son;
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
Such is his noble purpose; and believe 't,
The duke will lay upon him all the honour
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
Nothing in France, until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she; and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?
A servant only, and a gentleman
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
Which holds him much to have.
I will entreat you, when you see my son,
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honour that he loses: more I'll entreat you
In that and all your worthiest affairs.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Nothing in France, until he has no wife!
Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France;
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord! is't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? and is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-peering air,
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to't;
And, though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected: better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roar'd
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rousillon,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all: I will be gone;
My being here it is that holds thee hence:
Shall I stay here to do't?  no, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all: I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight,
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day!
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
The general of our horse thou art; and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To the extreme edge of hazard.
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file:
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done,
By sending me a letter? Read it again.
I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone:
Ambitious love hath so in me offended,
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie:
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
His name with zealous fervor sanctify:
His taken labours bid him me forgive;
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth:
He is too good and fair for death and me:
Whom I myself embrace, to set him free.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much,
As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
If I had given you this at over-night,
She might have been o'erta'en; and yet she writes,
Bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife;
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief.
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love: which of them both
Is dearest to me. I have no skill in sense
To make distinction: provide this messenger:
My heart is heavy and mine age is weak;
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Nay, come; for if they do approach the city, we
They say the French count has done most honourable service.
It is reported that he has taken their greatest
We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary
Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with
French earl: the honour of a maid is her name; and
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited
I know that knave; hang him! one Parolles: a
I hope your own grace will keep you where you are,
You shall not need to fear me.
Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie at
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.
Hark you! they come this way.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged;
The rather, for I think I know your hostess
If you shall please so, pilgrim.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
You came, I think, from France?
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
The Count Rousillon: know you such a one?
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him:
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the king had married him
Against his liking: think you it is so?
Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady.
There is a gentleman that serves the count
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated: all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleased.
May be the amorous count solicits her
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid:
But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard
That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son;
That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife: if he were honester
He were much goodlier: is't not a handsome gentleman?
That leads him to these places: were I his lady,
I would Poison that vile rascal.
That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy?
Perchance he's hurt i' the battle.
He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us.
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents
There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me; and, to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his
If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
Do you think I am so far deceived in him?
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum,
I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum;
How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your
A pox on't, let it go; 'tis but a drum.
There was excellent command,--to charge in with our
That was not to be blamed in the command of the
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some
It might; but it is not now.
It is to be recovered: but that the merit of
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you
By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.
But you must not now slumber in it.
I'll about it this evening: and I will presently
May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?
I know not what the success will be, my lord; but
I know thou'rt valiant; and, to the possibility of
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a
You do not know him, my lord, as we do: certain it
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of
None in the world; but return with an invention and
We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case
I must go look my twigs: he shall be caught.
Your brother he shall go along with me.
As't please your lordship: I'll leave you.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
That's all the fault: I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold; but I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind,
Tokens and letters which she did re-send;
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature:
With all my heart, my lord.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate be fallen, I was well born,
And would not put my reputation now
First, give me trust, the count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
For you have show'd me that which well approves
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay and pay again
When I have found it. The count he wooes your daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent,
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will nought deny
That she'll demand: a ring the county wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it: this ring he holds
In most rich choice; yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
You see it lawful, then: it is no more,
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent: after this,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves; for he persists
As if his life lay on't.
Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact:
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
Good captain, let me be the interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again?
E'en such as you speak to me.
He must think us some band of strangers i' the
Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue
What the devil should move me to undertake the
Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
Is it possible he should know what he is, and be
I would the cutting of my garments would serve the
Or the baring of my beard; and to say it was in
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.
Though I swore I leaped from the window of the citadel.
Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I would swear
A drum now of the enemy's,--
Cargo, cargo, cargo, villiando par corbo, cargo.
O, ransom, ransom! do not hide mine eyes.
I know you are the Muskos' regiment:
And I shall lose my life for want of language;
If there be here German, or Dane, low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me; I'll
Discover that which shall undo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado: I understand thee, and can speak
O, pray, pray, pray! Manka revania dulche.
The general is content to spare thee yet;
And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee: haply thou mayst inform
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes; nay, I'll speak that
If I do not, damn me.
Come on; thou art granted space.
Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother,
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.
A' will betray us all unto ourselves:
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden, but a monument:
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stem;
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.
My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.
I prithee, do not strive against my vows:
I was compell'd to her; but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.
Till we serve you; but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.
But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the High'st to witness: then, pray you, tell me,
If I should swear by God's great attributes,
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
To swear by him whom I protest to love,
That I will work against him: therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd,
Be not so holy-cruel: love is holy;
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recover: say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.
I see that men make ropes in such a scarre
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.
I'll lend it thee, my dear; but have no power
It is an honour 'longing to our house,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world
In me to lose: thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honour on my part,
My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window:
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be deliver'd:
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu, till then; then, fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat in 's heart; she says all men
Have the like oaths: he had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead; therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid:
Only in this disguise I think't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
You have not given him his mother's letter?
I have delivered it an hour since: there is
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in
Florence, of a most chaste renown; and this night he
Now, God delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves,
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course
Is it not meant damnable in us, to be trumpeters of
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
That approaches apace; I would gladly have him see
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his
In the mean time, what hear you of these wars?
I hear there is an overture of peace.
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.
What will Count Rousillon do then? will he travel
I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether
Let it be forbid, sir; so should I be a great deal
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which
Hath the count all this intelligence?
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and
He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he hath
They shall be no more than needful there, if they
They cannot be too sweet for the king's tartness.
How now, my lord! is't not after midnight?
I have to-night dispatched sixteen businesses, a
I have congied with the duke, done my adieu with his
If the business be of any difficulty, and this
I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to
Bring him forth: has sat i' the stocks all night,
No matter: his heels have deserved it, in usurping
I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of
He calls for the tortures: what will you say
I will confess what I know without constraint: if
You are a merciful general. Our general bids you
And truly, as I hope to live.
Five or six thousand; but very weak and
Shall I set down your answer so?
Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and which way you will.
All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
You're deceived, my lord: this is Monsieur
Parolles, the gallant militarist,--that was his own
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
Five or six thousand horse, I said,-- I will say
He's very near the truth in this.
But I con him no thanks for't, in the nature he
Poor rogues, I pray you, say.
I humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, the
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present
What shall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my
I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of
Do you know this Captain Dumain?
I know him: a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris,
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though I know
Well, is this captain in the duke of Florence's camp?
Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.
Nay look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
What is his reputation with the duke?
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer
In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there,
Here 'tis; here's a paper: shall I read it to you?
I do not know if it be it or no.
That is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rousillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
Nay, I'll read it first, by your favour.
My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the
After he scores, he never pays the score:
Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before;
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this,
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss:
For count of this, the count's a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
I could endure any thing before but a cat, and now
I perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall be
My life, sir, in any case: not that I am afraid to
We'll see what may be done, so you confess freely;
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for
I begin to love him for this.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon
What say you to his expertness in war?
Faith, sir, he has led the drum before the English
He hath out-villained villany so far, that the
A pox on him, he's a cat still.
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not
Sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple
What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
Why does be ask him of me?
E'en a crow o' the same nest; not altogether so
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon.
I'll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die: the
O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death!
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.
So, look about you: know you any here?
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu?
Good captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet
You are undone, captain, all but your scarf; that
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?
If you could find out a country where but women were
Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall: simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
Rust, sword? cool, blushes! and, Parolles, live
Safest in shame! being fool'd, by foolery thrive!
There's place and means for every man alive.
That you may well perceive I have not wrong'd you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel:
Time was, I did him a desired office,
Dear almost as his life; which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth,
And answer, thanks: I duly am inform'd
His grace is at Marseilles; to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead: the army breaking,
My husband hies him home; where, heaven aiding,
And by the leave of my good lord the king,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love: doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But, O strange men!
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter. You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Go with your impositions, I am yours
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away;
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us:
All's well that ends well; still the fine's the crown;
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta
I would I had not known him; it was the death of the
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not much
Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool?
A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.
I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service.
So you were a knave at his service, indeed.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.
I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
Faith, sir, a' has an English name; but his fisnomy
The black prince, sir; alias, the prince of
Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not this
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee; and I
If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
A shrewd knave and an unhappy.
So he is. My lord that's gone made himself much
I like him well; 'tis not amiss. And I was about to
With very much content, my lord; and I wish it
His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able
It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might
You need but plead your honourable privilege.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but I
O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery
But it is your carbonadoed face.
Let us go see your son, I pray you: I long to talk
Faith there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it:
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you. In happy time;
This man may help me to his majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you, sir.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.
I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness;
An therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
To give this poor petition to the king,
And aid me with that store of power you have
He hence removed last night and with more haste
Lord, how we lose our pains!
ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon;
Since you are like to see the king before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.
And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd,
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.
Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this
Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it
Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; I spake
Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune's
Here is a purr of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's
My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly
And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't;
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.
You beg more than 'word,' then. Cox my passion!
O my good lord, you were the first that found me!
Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace,
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once
The king's coming; I know by his trumpets. Sirrah,
We lost a jewel of her; and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it: but your son,
As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know
And I beseech your majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth;
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
I have forgiven and forgotten all;
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watch'd the time to shoot.
But first I beg my pardon, the young lord
Did to his majesty, his mother and his lady
Offence of mighty note; but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither;
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition: let him not ask our pardon;
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
The incensing relics of it: let him approach,
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So 'tis our will he should.
What says he to your daughter? have you spoke?
All that he is hath reference to your highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That set him high in fame.
I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once: but to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth;
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warp'd the line of every other favour;
Scorn'd a fair colour, or express'd it stolen;
To a most hideous object: thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
From the great compt: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offence,
Crying, 'That's good that's gone.' Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave:
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust
Our own love waking cries to see what's done,
While shame full late sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin:
The main consents are had; and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage-day.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favour from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead,
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her at court,
Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.
This ring was mine; and, when I gave it Helen,
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft, to reave
Of what should stead her most?
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
I have seen her wear it; and she reckon'd it
I am sure I saw her wear it.
You are deceived, my lord; she never saw it:
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
Of her that threw it: noble she was, and thought
I stood engaged: but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune and inform'd her fully
I could not answer in that course of honour
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring: 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger,
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour;
And makest conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman,--'twill not prove so;--
And yet I know not: thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead; which nothing, but to close
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe,
More than to see this ring. Take him away.
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly fear'd too little. Away with him!
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings.
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
Here's a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage; and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
The heavens have thought well on thee Lafeu,
To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors:
Go speedily and bring again the count.
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
My suit, as I do understand, you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
Come hither, count; do you know these women?
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them: do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine, my lord.
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
You give away myself, which is known mine;
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
That she which marries you must marry me,
Your reputation comes too short for my daughter; you
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature,
Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour
Than in my thought it lies.
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
And was a common gamester to the camp.
He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price:
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel; yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o' the camp,
Of six preceding ancestors, that gem,
Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife;
You saw one here in court could witness it.
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument: his name's Parolles.
I saw the man to-day, if man he be.
Find him, and bring him hither.
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd;
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
She hath that ring of yours.
I think she has: certain it is I liked her,
And boarded her i' the wanton way of youth:
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and, in fine,
Her infinite cunning, with her modern grace,
Subdued me to her rate: she got the ring;
And I had that which any inferior might
You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife,
May justly diet me. I pray you yet;
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband;
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
What ring was yours, I pray you?
Know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
And this was it I gave him, being abed.
The story then goes false, you threw it him
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly, every feather stars you.
Is this the man you speak of?
Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which on your just proceeding I'll keep off,
By him and by this woman here what know you?
So please your majesty, my master hath been an
Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman?
Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.
He loved her, sir, and loved her not.
As thou art a knave, and no knave. What an
I am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.
He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.
Do you know he promised me marriage?
Faith, I know more than I'll speak.
But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest?
Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them,
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say
This ring, you say, was yours?
Where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
It was not lent me neither.
Where did you find it, then?
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?
This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes off
This ring was mine; I gave it his first wife.
It might be yours or hers, for aught I know.
Take her away; I do not like her now;
To prison with her: and away with him.
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
I'll put in bail, my liege.
I think thee now some common customer.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty:
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't;
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life;
I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.
She does abuse our ears: to prison with her.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir:
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord,
Who hath abused me, as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit him:
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled;
And at that time he got his wife with child:
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick:
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick:
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
The name and not the thing.
O my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring;
And, look you, here's your letter; this it says:
And are by me with child,'  & c. This is done:
Will you be mine, now you are doubly won?
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
O my dear mother, do I see you living?
Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon:
Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher: so,
I thank thee: wait on me home, I'll make sport with thee:
Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower;
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress, more or less,
All yet seems well; and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
The king's a beggar, now the play is done:
All is well ended, if this suit be won,
That you express content; which we will pay,
With strife to please you, day exceeding day:
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts;
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
