As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion
Yonder comes my master, your brother.
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will
Now, sir! what make you here?
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God
Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.
Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them?
What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should
Know you where your are, sir?
O, sir, very well; here in your orchard.
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys; he was my father, and he is thrice
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand
Sweet masters, be patient: for your father's
I will not, till I please: you shall hear me. My
And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent?
Well, sir, get you in: I will not long be troubled
I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my
Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I will
Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
So please you, he is here at the door and importunes
Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news at the
There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news:
Can you tell if Rosalind, the duke's daughter, be
O, no; for the duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves
Where will the old duke live?
They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and
What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke?
Marry, do I, sir; and I came to acquaint you with a
To-morrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit; and he that
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
Now will I stir this gamester: I hope I shall see
I kindle the boy thither; which now I'll go about.
I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of;
Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is
From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports. Let
Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal: but
What shall be our sport, then?
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from
I would we could do so, for her benefits are
Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world,
No? when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she
Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when
Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of
Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
Nature's; who perceiveth our natural wits too dull
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.
Where learned you that oath, fool?
Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they
How prove you that, in the great heap of your
Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and
By our beards, if we had them, thou art.
By my knavery, if I had it, then I were; but if you
Prithee, who is't that thou meanest?
One that old Frederick, your father, loves.
My father's love is enough to honour him: enough!
The more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what
By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the little
With his mouth full of news.
Which he will put on us, as pigeons feed their young.
All the better; we shall be the more marketable.
Bon jour, Monsieur Le Beau: what's the news?
Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
What colour, madam! how shall I answer you?
Well said: that was laid on with a trowel.
Nay, if I keep not my rank,--
You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of good
You tell us the manner of the wrestling.
I will tell you the beginning; and, if it please
Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man and his three sons,--
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
With bills on their necks, 'Be it known unto all men
The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the
But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies
Why, this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first
But is there any else longs to see this broken music
You must, if you stay here; for here is the place
Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and see it.
Come on: since the youth will not be entreated, his
Alas, he is too young! yet he looks successfully.
How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither
Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you;
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
Do so: I'll not be by.
Monsieur the challenger, the princesses call for you.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler?
No, fair princess; he is the general challenger: I
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your
Do, young sir; your reputation shall not therefore
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
And mine, to eke out hers.
Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you!
Your heart's desires be with you!
Come, where is this young gallant that is so
Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.
You shall try but one fall.
No, I warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him
An you mean to mock me after, you should not have
Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
Yes, I beseech your grace: I am not yet well breathed.
Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.
I would thou hadst been son to some man else:
The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy:
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed,
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth:
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son; and would not change that calling,
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind:
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured.
Let us go thank him and encourage him:
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserved:
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,
Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune,
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes;
I'll ask him what he would. Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
Have with you. Fare you well.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause and love,
Yet such is now the duke's condition
That he misconstrues all that you have done.
The duke is humorous; what he is indeed,
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
I thank you, sir: and, pray you, tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners;
But yet indeed the lesser is his daughter
The other is daughter to the banish'd duke,
And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
To keep his daughter company; whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well:
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:
Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon
Then there were two cousins laid up; when the one
But is all this for your father?
No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my heart.
I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself!
O, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in
The duke my father loved his father dearly.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
Why should I not? doth he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that, and do you love him
With his eyes full of anger.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste
And get you from our court.
Within these ten days if that thou be'st found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic,--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself:
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor:
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.
So was I when your highness took his dukedom;
So was I when your highness banish'd him:
Treason is not inherited, my lord;
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? my father was no traitor:
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,
Else had she with her father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay;
It was your pleasure and your own remorse:
I was too young that time to value her;
But now I know her: if she be a traitor,
Why so am I; we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together,
And wheresoever we went, like Juno's swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,
Her very silence and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name;
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips:
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:
I cannot live out of her company.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself:
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.
Prithee be cheerful: know'st thou not, the duke
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one:
Shall we be sunder'd? shall we part, sweet girl?
No: let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go and what to bear with us;
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out;
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire
And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
The like do you: so shall we pass along
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand; and--in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will--
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page;
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be call'd?
Something that hath a reference to my state
But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty and not to banishment.
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
That feelingly persuade me what I am.'
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
And this our life exempt from public haunt
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones and good in every thing.
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood:
To the which place a poor sequester'd stag,
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
Did come to languish, and indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,
Did he not moralize this spectacle?
O, yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream;
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much:' then, being there alone,
Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends,
The flux of company:' anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him; 'Ay' quoth Jaques,
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of the country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.
I'll bring you to him straight.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be: some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
And she believes, wherever they are gone,
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither;
If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
I'll make him find him: do this suddenly,
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
What, my young master? O, my gentle master!
O my sweet master! O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny priser of the humorous duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this, when what is comely
Come not within these doors; within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives:
Your brother--no, no brother; yet the son--
Yet not the son, I will not call him son
Of him I was about to call his father--
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie
And you within it: if he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off.
I overheard him and his practises.
This is no place; this house is but a butchery:
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither, so you come not here.
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food?
Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can;
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster-nurse
When service should in my old limbs lie lame
And unregarded age in corners thrown:
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;
And all this I give you. Let me be your servant:
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility;
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you;
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that, do choke their service up
Even with the having: it is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prunest a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry
But come thy ways; well go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content.
Master, go on, and I will follow thee,
To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years many their fortunes seek;
But at fourscore it is too late a week:
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well and not my master's debtor.
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's
I pray you, bear with me; I cannot go no further.
For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear
Well, this is the forest of Arden.
Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was
Look you, who comes here; a young man and an old in
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
I partly guess; for I have loved ere now.
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow:
But if thy love were ever like to mine--
As sure I think did never man love so--
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily!
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke
Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I
And mine; but it grows something stale with me.
I pray you, one of you question yond man
If he for gold will give us any food:
Peace, fool: he's not thy kinsman.
Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed:
Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd
And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze:
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on; but what is, come see.
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying any thing.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place.
And willingly could waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
Go with me: if you like upon report
The soil, the profit and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
Who loves to lie with me,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see No enemy
It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
My voice is ragged: I know I cannot please you.
I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to
Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me
More at your request than to please myself.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you;
Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the
And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is
And loves to live i' the sun,
And pleased with what he gets,
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see No enemy
I'll give you a verse to this note that I made
If it do come to pass
An if he will come to me.
And I'll go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared.
Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food!
Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell,
Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live
If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I
For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at
Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear
I think he be transform'd into a beast;
For I can no where find him like a man.
My lord, he is but even now gone hence:
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go, seek him: tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labour by his own approach.
Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
That your poor friends must woo your company?
A fool, a fool! I met a fool i' the forest,
A motley fool; a miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool
Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms and yet a motley fool.
And then he drew a dial from his poke,
And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock:
Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags:
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven;
And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer,
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm'd
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Provided that you weed your better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please; for so fools have;
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The 'why' is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob: if not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley; give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
What, for a counter, would I do but good?
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself;
And all the embossed sores and headed evils,
That thou with licence of free foot hast caught,
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
Why, who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name,
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not of my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then; how then? what then? Let me see wherein
My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
Then he hath wrong'd himself; if he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?
Why, I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
Of what kind should this cock come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility: yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.
An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.
I almost die for food; and let me have it.
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
I thought that all things had been savage here;
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time
If ever you have look'd on better days,
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be:
In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd:
And therefore sit you down in gentleness
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be minister'd.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limp'd in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort!
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
I thank you most for him.
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
Welcome; fall to: I will not trouble you
As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
Give us some music; and, good cousin, sing.
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
That dost not bite so nigh
Thy sting is not so sharp
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you have whisper'd faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is;
Seek him with candle; bring him dead or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth
Of what we think against thee.
O that your highness knew my heart in this!
I never loved my brother in my life.
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors;
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands:
Do this expediently and turn him going.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love:
And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character;
That every eye which in this forest looks
Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.
Run, run, Orlando; carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.
And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?
Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
No more but that I know the more one sickens the
Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
Truly, thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg, all
For not being at court? Your reason.
Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest
Not a whit, Touchstone: those that are good manners
Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their
Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again.
And they are often tarred over with the surgery of
Most shallow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a
You have too courtly a wit for me: I'll rest.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man!
God make incision in thee! thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes
Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
From the east to western Ind,
Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
Through all the world bears Rosalind.
Let no fair be kept in mind
I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and
If a hart do lack a hind,
If the cat will after kind,
They that reap must sheaf and bind;
He that sweetest rose will find
Must find love's prick and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you
Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.
Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it
You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the
Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.
Why should this a desert be?
Tongues I'll hang on every tree,
Some, how brief the life of man
That the stretching of a span
Buckles in his sum of age;
Teaching all that read to know
That one body should be fill'd
Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
To have the touches dearest prized.
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
And I to live and die her slave.
O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.
Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat;
O, yes, I heard them all, and more too; for some of
That's no matter: the feet might bear the verses.
Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
Trow you who hath done this?
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to
Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence,
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
South-sea of discovery; I prithee, tell me who is it
So you may put a man in your belly.
Is he of God's making? What manner of man? Is his
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why, God will send more, if the man will be
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's
Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and
How parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see
You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first: 'tis a
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
I found him under a tree, like a dropped acorn.
It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops
There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
Cry 'holla' to thy tongue, I prithee; it curvets
O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?
I thank you for your company; but, good faith, I had
And so had I; but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
God be wi' you: let's meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you, mar no more trees with writing
I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
Just as high as my heart.
You are full of pretty answers. Have you not been
Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from
You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of
Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? and
I will chide no breather in the world but myself,
The worst fault you have is to be in love.
By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found
He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you
There I shall see mine own figure.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.
I'll tarry no longer with you: farewell, good
I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur
I pray you, what is't o'clock?
You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock
Then there is no true lover in the forest; else
And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that
By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
Marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the
Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of
With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as
With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between
With this shepherdess, my sister; here in the
Are you native of this place?
As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Your accent is something finer than you could
I have been told so of many: but indeed an old
I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
There were none principal; they were all like one
I prithee, recount some of them.
No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that
Rosalind: if I could meet that fancy-monger I would
I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you tell me
There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he
A lean cheek, which you have not, a blue eye and
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
Me believe it! you may as soon make her that you
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deserves
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes, one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me
And thus I cured him; and this way will I take upon
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind
Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me
Go with me to it and I'll show it you and by the way
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay you must call me Rosalind. Come, sister, will you go?
Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your
Your features! Lord warrant us! what features!
I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a
Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
I do not know what 'poetical' is: is it honest in
No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most
Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?
I do, truly; for thou swearest to me thou art
Would you not have me honest?
No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured; for
Well, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.
Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness!
Well, the gods give us joy!
Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
Even so. Poor men alone? No, no; the noblest deer
Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met: will you
Is there none here to give the woman?
I will not take her on gift of any man.
Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
Good even, good Master What-ye-call't: how do you,
As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.
Leave me not behind thee: but,--
I will not to wedding with thee.
Never talk to me; I will weep.
Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider
But have I not cause to weep?
As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.
His very hair is of the dissembling colour.
Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are
I' faith, his hair is of a good colour.
An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a
Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in.
You have heard him swear downright he was.
I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
O, that's a brave man! he writes brave verses,
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
If you will see a pageant truly play'd,
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little and I shall conduct you,
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me; do not, Phebe;
Say that you love me not, but say not so
Whose heart the accustom'd sight of death makes hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner:
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye:
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart;
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to swoon; why now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee:
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it; lean but upon a rush,
Thy palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
If ever,--as that ever may be near,--
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not;
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,--
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it:
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
That can entame my spirits to your worship.
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman: 'tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children:
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.
But, mistress, know yourself: down on your knees,
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love:
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can: you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy; love him; take his offer:
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee, shepherd: fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
He's fallen in love with your foulness and she'll
For no ill will I bear you.
I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine:
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud: though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be:
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee,
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I'll employ thee too:
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd.
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps: loose now and then
A scatter'd smile, and that I'll live upon.
Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
Not very well, but I have met him oft;
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth: not very pretty:
But, sure, he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
He'll make a proper man: the best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offence his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall; yet for his years he's tall:
His leg is but so so; and yet 'tis well:
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mix'd in his cheek; 'twas just the difference
Between the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but, for my part,
I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
And, now I am remember'd, scorn'd at me:
I marvel why I answer'd not again:
But that's all one; omittance is no quittance.
I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?
The matter's in my head and in my heart:
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am so; I do love it better than laughing.
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.
Why then, 'tis good to be a post.
I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is
A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to
Yes, I have gained my experience.
And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!
Nay, then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.
Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Break an hour's promise in love! He that will
Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
Ay, of a snail; for though he comes slowly, he
I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.
It pleases him to call you so; but he hath a
Rosalind of a better leer than you.
Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or
I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
Well in her person I say I will not have you.
Then in mine own person I die.
No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is
But these are all lies: men have died from time to
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now
I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on
Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?
Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.
Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?
You must begin, 'Will you, Orlando--'
Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
Why now; as fast as she can marry us.
Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
I might ask you for your commission; but I do take
So do all thoughts; they are winged.
Now tell me how long you would have her after you
Say 'a day,' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando;
But will my Rosalind do so?
By my life, she will do as I do.
Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?
Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
Alas! dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
I must attend the duke at dinner: by two o'clock I
Ay, go your ways, go your ways; I knew what you
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate:
O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour
No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
Which is he that killed the deer?
Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman
Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
What shall he have that kill'd the deer?
His leather skin and horns to wear.
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn;
It was a crest ere thou wast born:
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
My errand is to you, fair youth;
My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
I know not the contents; but, as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer; bear this, bear all:
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will!
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.
No, I protest, I know not the contents:
Come, come, you are a fool
And turn'd into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
A freestone-colour'd hand; I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:
She has a huswife's hand; but that's no matter:
I say she never did invent this letter;
This is a man's invention and his hand.
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
A style for-challengers; why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention
Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet;
Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
Art thou god to shepherd turn'd,
That a maiden's heart hath burn'd?
Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
If the scorn of your bright eyne
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect!
Whiles you chid me, I did love;
How then might your prayers move!
He that brings this love to thee
Little knows this love in me:
And by him seal up thy mind;
Whether that thy youth and kind
Of me and all that I can make;
Or else by him my love deny,
And then I'll study how to die.
Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheep-cote fenced about with olive trees?
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom:
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself;
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description;
Such garments and such years: 'The boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister: the woman low
And browner than her brother.' Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?
It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
I am: what must we understand by this?
Some of my shame; if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
When last the young Orlando parted from you
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd
The opening of his mouth; but suddenly,
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush: under which bush's shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
And he did render him the most unnatural
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that desert place:--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love;
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted
And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound;
And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
I would I were at home.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
This was not counterfeit: there is too great
Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
So I do: but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
And good even to you, sir.
Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
A ripe age. Is thy name William?
A fair name. Wast born i' the forest here?
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
Then learn this of me: to have, is to have; for it
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
Our master and mistress seeks you; come, away, away!
Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.
Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me;
You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow:
O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
Ay, and greater wonders than that.
O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was
They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the
Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd;
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears;
And so am I for Phebe.
It is to be all made of faith and service;
And so am I for Phebe.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance;
And so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Who do you speak to, 'Why blame you me to love you?'
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling
I will help you, if I can:
I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together.
I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and I'll be
I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
I will content you, if what pleases you contents
I'll meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.
I'll not fail, if I live.
To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey; to-morrow will
I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is
By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you: sit i' the middle.
Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking or
I'faith, i'faith; and both in a tune, like two
It was a lover and his lass,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That o'er the green corn-field did pass
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
Between the acres of the rye,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
These pretty country folks would lie,
This carol they began that hour,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
How that a life was but a flower
And therefore take the present time,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino;
For love is crowned with the prime
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.
By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not;
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her.
If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
To make these doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
Salutation and greeting to you all!
Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
And how was that ta'en up?
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.
God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the
Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more
If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he
Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book; as you have
The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the
Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the
Countercheque Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with
Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under
Then is there mirth in heaven,
That thou mightst join her hand with his
Whose heart within his bosom is.
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
I'll have no father, if you be not he:
I'll have no husband, if you be not he:
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
Here's eight that must take hands
You and you no cross shall part:
You and you are heart in heart
You to his love must accord,
Or have a woman to your lord:
You and you are sure together,
As the winter to foul weather.
How thus we met, and these things finish.
O blessed bond of board and bed!
To Hymen, god of every town!
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Address'd a mighty power; which were on foot,
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came;
Where meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest, let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall.
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
The duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court?
To him will I : out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.
You to your former honour I bequeath;
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:
You to a love that your true faith doth merit:
You to your land and love and great allies:
You to a long and well-deserved bed:
And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victuall'd. So, to your pleasures:
I am for other than for dancing measures.
To see no pastime I	what you would have
I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.
Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue;
