Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer
that you praised so to the queen? O, that I knew
this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns
Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married
to three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all:
let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry
may do homage: find me to marry me with Octavius
Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
Then belike my children shall have no names:
prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful
prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee,
tell her but a worky-day fortune.
Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas,--come,
his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman
that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee! and let
her die too, and give him a worse! and let worst
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him
laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good
Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a
matter of more weight; good Isis, I beseech thee!
Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people!
for, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man
loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a
foul knave uncuckolded: therefore, dear Isis, keep
Lo, now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
cuckold, they would make themselves whores, but
Why, then, we kill all our women:
we see how mortal an unkindness is to them;
if they suffer our departure, death's the word.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die; it were
pity to cast them away for nothing; though, between
them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of
this, dies instantly; I have seen her die twenty
times upon far poorer moment: I do think there is
mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon
her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
Alack, sir, no; her passions are made of nothing but
the finest part of pure love: we cannot call her
winds and waters sighs and tears; they are greater
storms and tempests than almanacs can report: this
cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she makes a
shower of rain as well as Jove.
O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece
of work; which not to have been blest withal would
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When
it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man
from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth;
comforting therein, that when old robes are worn
out, there are members to make new. If there were
no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
and the case to be lamented: this grief is crowned
with consolation; your old smock brings forth a new
petticoat: and indeed the tears live in an onion
And the business you have broached here cannot be
without you; especially that of Cleopatra's, which
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go
Or, if you borrow one another's love for the
instant, you may, when you hear no more words of
Pompey, return it again: you shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecaenas! My
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
digested. You stayed well by 't in Egypt.
Ay, sir; we did sleep day out of countenance, and
made the night light with drinking.
Eight wild-boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and
but twelve persons there; is this true?
This was but as a fly by an eagle: we had much more
monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to
When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up
his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed; or my reporter devised
[Aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have
made this treaty.--You and I have known, sir.
I will praise any man that will praise me; though it
cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Yes, something you can deny for your own
safety: you have been a great thief by sea.
There I deny my land service. But give me your
hand, Menas: if our eyes had authority, here they
You've said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony
here: pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the
marriage than the love of the parties.
I think so too. But you shall find, the band that
seems to tie their friendship together will be the
very strangler of their amity: Octavia is of a
Not he that himself is not so; which is Mark Antony.
He will to his Egyptian dish again: then shall the
sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar; and, as
I said before, that which is the strength of their
amity shall prove the immediate author of their
variance. Antony will use his affection where it is:
he married but his occasion here.
Here they'll be, man. Some o' their plants are
ill-rooted already: the least wind i' the world
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
cries out 'No more;' reconciles them to his
entreaty, and himself to the drink.
But it raises the greater war between him and
Why, this is to have a name in great men's
fellowship: I had as lief have a reed that will do
me no service as a partisan I could not heave.
To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen
to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be,
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
operation of your sun: so is your crocodile.
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies'
pyramises are very goodly things; without
[Aside to MENAS]                 Say in mine ear:
[Aside to POMPEY]  Forsake thy seat, I do beseech
And hear me speak a word.
It is shaped, sir, like itself; and it is as broad
as it hath breadth: it is just so high as it is,
and moves with its own organs: it lives by that
which nourisheth it; and the elements once out of
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a
[Aside to MENAS]  Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of
Do as I bid you. Where's this cup I call'd for?
[Aside to POMPEY]  If for the sake of merit thou
A' bears the third part of the world, man; see'st
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  He were the worse for that,
So is he, being a man.
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst
Pompey, presently denied him rivality; would not let
him partake in the glory of the action: and not
resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly
wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal, seizes him: so
the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  'Tis one of those odd
Truly, I have him: but I would not be the party
that should desire you to touch him, for his biting
is immortal; those that do die of it do seldom or
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of
them no longer than yesterday: a very honest woman,
but something given to lie; as a woman should not
do, but in the way of honesty: how she died of the
biting of it, what pain she felt: truly, she makes
a very good report o' the worm; but he that will
believe all that they say, shall never be saved by
half that they do: but this is most fallible, the
You must think this, look you, that the worm will
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the
keeping of wise people; for, indeed, there is no
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is
You must not think I am so simple but I know the
devil himself will not eat a woman: I know that a
woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her
not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the
gods great harm in their women; for in every ten
that they make, the devils mar five.
