Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears
Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce
But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he
hath great care to please his wife.
Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I
had rather have it a head: an you use these blows
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
But, I pray, sir why am I beaten?
Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say every why hath
I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for
something. But say, sir, is it dinner-time?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time: there's a
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is,
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts;
and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth
it in a kind of jollity.
The one, to save the money that he spends in
trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not
You would all this time have proved there is no
Marry, and did, sir; namely, no time to recover hair
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore
to the world's end will have bald followers.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
[Within]  Let him walk from whence he came, lest he
[Within]  Right, sir; I'll tell you when, an you tell
[Within]  Nor to-day here you must not; come again
[Within]  The porter for this time, sir, and my name
[Within]  What a coil is there, Dromio? who are those
[Within]  Have at you with another; that's--When?
[Within]  If thy name be call'd Luce--Luce, thou hast
[Within]  Who is that at the door that keeps all
[Within]  By my troth, your town is troubled with
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would
[Within]  Break any breaking here, and I'll break your
[Within]  It seems thou want'st breaking: out upon
Here's too much 'out upon thee!' I pray thee,
Do you know me, sir? am I Dromio? am I your man?
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman; one
that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your
horse; and she would have me as a beast: not that, I
being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may
not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.' I have
but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
Marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench and all grease;
and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I
warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday,
she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.
Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
clean kept: for why, she sweats; a man may go over
shoes in the grime of it.
Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, that's
an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip:
she is spherical, like a globe; I could find out
In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no
whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her chin,
by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
Oh, sir, upon her nose all o'er embellished with
rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich
aspect to the hot breath of Spain; who sent whole
armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
Oh, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this
drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me, call'd me
Dromio; swore I was assured to her; told me what
privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch:
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
faith and my heart of steel,
She had transform'd me to a curtal dog and made
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
No, no, the bell: 'tis time that I were gone:
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock
O, yes; if any hour meet a sergeant, a' turns back for
Master, here's the gold you sent me for. What, have
you got the picture of old Adam new-apparelled?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
that keeps the prison: he that goes in the calf's
skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came
behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
No? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, like a
bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir,
that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
and 'rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed
men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up
his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings
any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that
thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'God
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
bark Expedition put forth to-night; and then were
you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam; and here
she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof
comes that the wenches say 'God damn me;' that's as
much to say 'God make me a light wench.' It is
written, they appear to men like angels of light:
light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn;
ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat; or bespeak a
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long
ears. I have served him from the hour of my
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me
with beating; I am waked with it when I sleep;
raised with it when I sit; driven out of doors with
it when I go from home; welcomed home with it when
I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a
beggar wont her brat; and, I think when he hath
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end; or
rather, the prophecy like the parrot, 'beware the
Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
Faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us
no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold:
methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not; and whatsoever a
man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
