Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live register'd upon our brazen tombs
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
The endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors,--for so you are,
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the world's desires,--
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little Academe,
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here:
Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honour down
That violates the smallest branch herein:
If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved; 'tis but a three years' fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine:
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumain is mortified:
The grosser manner of these world's delights
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die;
With all these living in philosophy.
I can but say their protestation over;
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances;
As, not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then, to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day--
When I was wont to think no harm all night
And make a dark night too of half the day--
Which I hope well is not enrolled there:
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
I only swore to study with your grace
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study? let me know.
Why, that to know, which else we should not know.
Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?
Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus,--to study where I well may dine,
When I to feast expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know:
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain,
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upon a book
To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look:
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile:
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun
That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won
Save base authority from others' books
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
That give a name to every fixed star
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
Fit in his place and time.
Biron is like an envious sneaping frost,
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled mirth;
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out: go home, Biron: adieu.
No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you:
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore
And bide the penance of each three years' day.
Give me the paper; let me read the same;
And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
This article, my liege, yourself must break;
For well you know here comes in embassy
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak--
A maid of grace and complete majesty--
To her decrepit, sick and bedrid father:
Therefore this article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired princess hither.
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
While it doth study to have what it would
It doth forget to do the thing it should,
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
We must of force dispense with this decree;
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years' space;
For every man with his affects is born,
Not by might master'd but by special grace:
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me;
I am forsworn on 'mere necessity.'
So to the laws at large I write my name:
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame:
Suggestions are to other as to me;
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain;
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One whom the music of his own vain tongue
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny:
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate
In high-born words the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
But, I protest, I love to hear him lie
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
And so to study, three years is but short.
Which is the duke's own person?
I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or to
Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In manner and form following, sir; all those three:
I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with
As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend
Will you hear this letter with attention?
As we would hear an oracle.
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
Not a word of Costard yet.
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in
Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park. Then
Dull; a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say
I do confess much of the hearing it but little of
It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment, to be taken
I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.
This was no damsel, neither, sir; she was a virgin.
It is so varied, too; for it was proclaimed 'virgin.'
If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.
This maid will not serve your turn, sir.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.
Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Biron, see him deliver'd o'er:
And go we, lords, to put in practise that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
I'll lay my head to any good man's hat,
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is, I was
Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit
A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.
Why tough senior? why tough senior?
Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal?
I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your
How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or
I apt, and my saying pretty?
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
Speak you this in my praise, master?
I will praise an eel with the same praise.
What, that an eel is ingenious?
I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.
I love not to be crossed.
I have promised to study three years with the duke.
You may do it in an hour, sir.
How many is one thrice told?
I am ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
I confess both: they are both the varnish of a
Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum of
It doth amount to one more than two.
Which the base vulgar do call three.
Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here
I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is
Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name
Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great
O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do
Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
Tell me precisely of what complexion.
Is that one of the four complexions?
As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
Green indeed is the colour of lovers; but to have a
It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
My love is most immaculate white and red.
Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under
My father's wit and my mother's tongue, assist me!
Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty and
If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will ne'er be known,
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
For still her cheeks possess the same
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of
Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
The world was very guilty of such a ballad some
I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the
Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
Forbear till this company be past.
Sir, the duke's pleasure is, that you keep Costard
For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she
I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
I will visit thee at the lodge.
I know where it is situate.
Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou
Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on a
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they
Take away this villain; shut him up.
Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.
No, sir; that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation
Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their
God I have as little patience as another man; and
I do affect the very ground, which is base, where
Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club;
The first and second cause will not serve my turn;
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits:
Consider who the king your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,
Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues:
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant, all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court:
Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his grace:
Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville:
A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd;
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will;
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
They say so most that most his humours know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved:
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Biron they call him; but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour's talk withal:
His eye begets occasion for his wit;
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales
And younger hearings are quite ravished;
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Navarre had notice of your fair approach;
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.
Hear me, dear lady; I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold:
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner, that I were away;
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
How needless was it then to ask the question!
You must not be so quick.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
The hour that fools should ask.
Fair fall the face it covers!
Nay, then will I be gone.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more; in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the king your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his majesty.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;
Which we much rather had depart withal
And have the money by our father lent
Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast
And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the king my father too much wrong
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And if you prove it, I'll repay it back
For such a sum from special officers
So please your grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound:
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me: at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
As honour without breach of honour may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness:
You may not come, fair princess, in my gates;
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell:
To-morrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place!
Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.
I would you heard it groan.
Will you prick't with your eye?
Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
She is an heir of Falconbridge.
She is a most sweet lady.
Not unlike, sir, that may be.
What's her name in the cap?
To her will, sir, or so.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord:
Not a word with him but a jest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me.
My lips are no common, though several they be.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men; for here 'tis abused.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With that which we lovers entitle affected.
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
His heart, like an agate, with your print impress'd,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd:
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass'd,
Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd:
His face's own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.
He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
Ay, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,
Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
How meanest thou? brawling in French?
No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at
These are complements, these are humours; these
How hast thou purchased this experience?
No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your
Negligent student! learn her by heart.
By heart and in heart, boy.
And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.
A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at
Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.
A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassador
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
The way is but short: away!
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
You are too swift, sir, to say so:
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he:
I shoot thee at the swain.
A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy; begin.
No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the
By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly
Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, and
Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,
And stay'd the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.
A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
Let me see; a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
True, and I for a plantain: thus came your
Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy:
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and,
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew!
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three
O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
I thank your worship: God be wi' you!
Stay, slave; I must employ thee:
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
When would you have it done, sir?
Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
Thou knowest not what it is.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
Why, villain, thou must know first.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
It must be done this afternoon.
Hark, slave, it is but this:
The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip;
A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
A domineering pedant o'er the boy;
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Of trotting 'paritors:--O my little heart:--
And I to be a corporal of his field,
And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!
What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watch'd that it may still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And, among three, to love the worst of all;
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Some men must love my lady and some Joan.
Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
I know not; but I think it was not he.
Whoe'er a' was, a' show'd a mounting mind.
Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch:
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? first praise me and again say no?
O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See see, my beauty will be saved by merit!
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes,
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Only for praise: and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
What's your will, sir? what's your will?
I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
O, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good friend of mine:
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve;
This letter is mistook, it importeth none here;
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
Zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the
The captive is enriched: on whose side? the
Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play:
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived but I remember the style.
Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the prince and his bookmates.
To whom shouldst thou give it?
From my lord to my lady.
From which lord to which lady?
From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.
Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?
Shall I teach you to know?
Why, she that bears the bow.
My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
Well, then, I am the shooter.
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes
But she herself is hit lower: have I hit her now?
Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a
Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
Wide o' the bow hand! i' faith, your hand is out.
Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.
I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.
By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
Armado o' th' one side,--O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a'
And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
Very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimony
The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
I said the deer was not a haud credo; twas a pricket.
O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
And such barren plants are set before us, that we
Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school:
But omne bene, say I; being of an old father's mind,
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five
Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weeks when he came to
The allusion holds in the exchange.
God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds
And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange; for
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge; so it shall
I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty
Some say a sore; but not a sore, till now made
The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps
Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a
Sir, I praise the Lord for you; and so may my
Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall
I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca
God give you good morrow, master Parson.
Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should be
Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
Good master Parson, be so good as read me this
Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra
Ruminat,--and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I
Chi non ti vede non ti pretia.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee
Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather,
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd!
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove:
Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art would
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong,
That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.
You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the
Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso,
Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange
I will overglance the superscript: 'To the
Rosaline.' I will look again on the intellect of
Biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here
Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
Sir tell me not of the father; I do fear colourable
I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil
And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is
And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not
The king he is hunting the deer; I am coursing
Ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, I a sheep:
I do, hang me; i' faith, I will not. O, but her
So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows:
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light;
Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep:
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel,
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper:
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
I could put thee in comfort. Not by two that I know:
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move:
O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is:
Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhalest this vapour-vow; in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To lose an oath to win a paradise?
This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.
God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.
By whom shall I send this?--Company! stay.
All hid, all hid; an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.
More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
Dumain transform'd! four woodcocks in a dish!
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.
An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
O that I had my wish!
And I mine too, good Lord!
Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?
I would forget her; but a fever she
Reigns in my blood and will remember'd be.
A fever in your blood! why, then incision
Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!
Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
Love, whose month is ever May,
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
That the lover, sick to death,
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alack, my hand is sworn
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet!
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee;
Thou for whom Jove would swear
This will I send, and something else more plain,
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville,
Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note;
For none offend where all alike do dote.
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
You chide at him, offending twice as much;
You do not love Maria; Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush
And mark'd you both and for you both did blush:
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion:
Ay me! says one; O Jove! the other cries;
One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes:
You would for paradise break faith, and troth;
And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.
What will Biron say when that he shall hear
Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me!
Good heart, what grace hast thou, thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears;
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
You found his mote; the king your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of teen!
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? all about the breast:
Are we betray'd thus to thy over-view?
Not you to me, but I betray'd by you:
I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in;
I am betray'd, by keeping company
With men like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for love? or spend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A true man or a thief that gallops so?
I post from love: good lover, let me go.
The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:
Our parson misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.
How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
It is Biron's writing, and here is his name.
Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess:
He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,
Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
As true we are as flesh and blood can be:
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
Young blood doth not obey an old decree:
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
That, like a rude and savage man of Inde,
At the first opening of the gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
She an attending star, scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron:
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,--
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not:
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs,
She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy:
O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath? where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons and the suit of night;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
O, if in black my lady's brows be deck'd,
It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colours should be wash'd away.
I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies
The street should see as she walk'd overhead.
But what of this? are we not all in love?
Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
Then leave this chat; and, good Biron, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Have at you, then, affection's men at arms.
Consider what you first did swear unto,
To fast, to study, and to see no woman;
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young;
And where that you have vow'd to study, lords,
In that each of you have forsworn his book,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of study's excellence
Without the beauty of a woman's face?
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long-during action tires
The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
Now, for not looking on a woman's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes
And study too, the causer of your vow;
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself
And where we are our learning likewise is:
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
Do we not likewise see our learning there?
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain;
But, with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye;
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind;
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd:
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockl'd snails;
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste:
For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair:
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs;
O, then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain and nourish all the world:
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men,
Or for men's sake, the authors of these women,
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them too: therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masks and merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
Away, away! no time shall be omitted
That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn;
And justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner
Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his
A most singular and choice epithet.
He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer
Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd,
O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word;
Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,
Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or
I will repeat them,--a, e, i,--
The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u.
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet
Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
What is the figure? what is the figure?
Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers'
O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem.
Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is
Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar,
I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is
The very all of all is,--but, sweet heart, I do
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman,
Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for
Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in
An excellent device! so, if any of the audience
For the rest of the Worthies?--
Shall I tell you a thing?
We will have, if this fadge not, an antique. I
Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.
I'll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play
On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in:
A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving king.
Madame, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,
Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand years a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him; a' kill'd your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
And so she died: had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died:
And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
Look what you do, you do it still i' the dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
But Rosaline, you have a favour too:
Who sent it? and what is it?
An if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favour were as great; be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron:
The numbers true; and, were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground:
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink; a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
My red dominical, my golden letter:
O, that your face were not so full of O's!
A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?
Did he not send you twain?
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:
The letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
The chain were longer and the letter short?
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Biron I'll torture ere I go:
O that I knew he were but in by the week!
How I would make him fawn and beg and seek
And wait the season and observe the times
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes
And shape his service wholly to my hests
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So perttaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
That he should be my fool and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd,
As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote;
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her grace?
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments; you'll be surprised:
Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addrest
The king and his companions: warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And overheard what you shall overhear,
That, by and by, disguised they will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage:
Action and accent did they teach him there;
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out,
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil;
I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
With that, all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder:
One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd and swore
A better speech was never spoke before;
Another, with his finger and his thumb,
Cried, 'Via! we will do't, come what will come;'
The third he caper'd, and cried, 'All goes well;'
The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
With that, they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To cheque their folly, passion's solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus.
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance;
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
By favours several which they did bestow.
And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd;
For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd;
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
And then the king will court thee for his dear;
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.
And change your favours too; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on, then; wear the favours most in sight.
But in this changing what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
They do it but in mocking merriment;
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire to't?
No, to the death, we will not move a foot;
Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own:
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame.
The trumpet sounds: be mask'd; the maskers come.
All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!--
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
A holy parcel of the fairest dames.
That ever turn'd their--backs--to mortal views!
That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!--Out--
Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
They will not answer to that epithet;
You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!
What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:
If they do speak our language, 'tis our will:
That some plain man recount their purposes
What would you with the princess?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her, we have measured many miles
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say, that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easily told.
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone,
Are number'd in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you:
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without accompt.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, may worship it.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.
Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
But your legs should do it.
Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
We'll not be nice: take hands. We will not dance.
Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu;
Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
I am best pleased with that.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice!
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Take that for your fair lady.
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
O for your reason! quickly, sir; I long.
You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
No, I'll not be your half
Take all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.
Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
One word in private with you, ere I die.
Bleat softly then; the butcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
Above the sense of sense; so sensible
Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?
This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.
O, they were all in lamentable cases!
The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.
Biron did swear himself out of all suit.
Dumain was at my service, and his sword:
No point, quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart;
And trow you what he called me?
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes; for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.
They will, they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change favours; and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud;
Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's, mock them still, as well known as disguised:
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
Fair sir, God save you! Where's the princess?
Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
And utters it again when God doth please:
He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve;
A' can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he
That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy;
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honourable terms: nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and in ushering
Mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet;
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet:
This is the flower that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone;
And consciences, that will not die in debt,
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page out of his part!
See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman show'd thee? and what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me; and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke;
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house's guest;
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game:
A mess of Russians left us but of late.
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord:
My lady, to the manner of the days,
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour,
And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet,
With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light: your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,--
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
That hid the worse and show'd the better face.
We are descried; they'll mock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout;
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance;
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song!
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
I do forswear them; and I here protest,
By this white glove;--how white the hand, God knows!--
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes:
And, to begin, wench,--so God help me, la!--
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Write, 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes;
These lords are visited; you are not free,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.
It is not so; for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
Peace! for I will not have to do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Were not you here but even now disguised?
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.
I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto moreover
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
God give thee joy of him! the noble lord
Most honourably doth unhold his word.
What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
My faith and this the princess I did give:
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy:
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favours: and then we,
Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
Much upon this it is: and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by the squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
You put our page out: go, you are allow'd;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? there's an eye
Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.
Welcome, pure wit! thou partest a fair fray.
O Lord, sir, they would know
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
No, sir; but it is vara fine,
And three times thrice is nine.
Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,--
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of
We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take
Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy
To have one show worse than the king's and his company.
I say they shall not come.
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now:
That sport best pleases that doth least know how:
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents:
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.
A right description of our sport, my lord.
Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal
He speaks not like a man of God's making.
That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for,
I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding
I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He
Great; the parish curate, Alexander; Armado's page,
Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if
These four will change habits, and present the other five.
There is five in the first show.
You are deceived; 'tis not so.
The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
You lie, you are not he.
Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friends
I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big--
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
When in the world I lived, I was the world's
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,--
Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.
Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.
The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alexander.
When in the world I lived, I was the world's
Most true, 'tis right; you were so, Alisander.
Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of
There, an't shall please you; a foolish mild man; an
Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis;
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
Ergo I come with this apology.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
The more shame for you, Judas.
Begin, sir; you are my elder.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
A Death's face in a ring.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
The carved-bone face on a flask.
Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.
Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
And now forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
You have put me out of countenance.
False; we have given thee faces.
But you have out-faced them all.
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the ass to the Jude; give it him:--Jud-as, away!
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.
Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
His leg is too big for Hector's.
No; he is best endued in the small.
He's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea
From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.
The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Speak, brave Hector: we are much delighted.
I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.
The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she
Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor
Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is
Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!
Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them
Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than will
By the north pole, I do challenge thee.
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
I'll slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,
I'll do it in my shirt.
Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you
Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat
You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt; I go
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of
But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.
I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father--
Even so; my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.
For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have
Boyet, prepare; I will away tonight.
Madam, not so; I do beseech you, stay.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavors; and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath: your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue:
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate:
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purposed; since, to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
I understand you not: my griefs are double.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
And by these badges understand the king.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Play'd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deform'd us, fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end of our intents:
And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,--
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance:
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false,
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both,--fair ladies, you:
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love;
Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council, rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time:
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.
We did not quote them so.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this:
If for my love, as there is no such cause,
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial and last love;
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine
I will be thine; and till that instant shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the other's heart.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.
But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?
A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With three-fold love I wish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:
Come when the king doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? mistress, look on me;
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there:
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron,
Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be; it is impossible:
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
A twelvemonth! well; befall what will befall,
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play;
Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,
That's too long for a play.
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am
Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;
When daisies pied and violets blue
Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 	Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
When shepherds pipe on oaten straws
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws,
And maidens bleach their summer smocks
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 	Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
When icicles hang by the wall
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail
And Tom bears logs into the hall
And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nipp'd and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit;
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
When all aloud the wind doth blow
And coughing drowns the parson's saw
And birds sit brooding in the snow
And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit;
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of
Apollo. You that way: we this way.
