In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and
I am glad to see your worships well.
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault;
I will answer it straight; I have done all this.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Word of denial in thy labras here!
Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so,
I shall do that that is reason.
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
I have spoke; let him follow.
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
Trudge, plod away o' the hoof; seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.
Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
And I to Ford shall eke unfold
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night:
Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing.
Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
Why, then the world's mine oyster.
Which I with sword will open.
As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife and
Page's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers:
Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.
Take your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a
Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door,
Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
Pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman.
I love thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.
Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
I see I cannot get thy father's love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
He doth object I am too great of birth--,
And that, my state being gall'd with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth:
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My riots past, my wild societies;
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne:
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags;
And 'tis the very riches of thyself
Yet seek my father's love; still seek it, sir:
Cannot attain it, why, then,--hark you hither!
O, what a world of vile ill-favor'd faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!
Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman in
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne.
Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house:
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all cheques, rebukes and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love
And not retire: let me have your good will.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' the earth
And bowl'd to death with turnips!
Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in;
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-night
Give my sweet Nan this ring: there's for thy pains.
Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.
Which way should be go? how should I bestow him?
Shall I put him into the basket again?
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir
John. Unless you go out disguised--
Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse him enough.
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt;
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand
In him that was of late an heretic,
Be not as extreme in submission
But let our plot go forward: let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest,
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns;
And there he blasts the tree and takes the cattle
And makes milch-kine yield blood and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner:
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
Received and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak:
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come:
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? what is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter and my little son
And three or four more of their growth we'll dress
Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands: upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song: upon their sight,
We two in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about
And, fairy-like, to-pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.
We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
Be practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy.
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
Nay I'll to him again in name of Brook
He'll tell me all his purpose: sure, he'll come.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.
I'll to the doctor: he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well money'd, and his friends
Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
Who mutually hath answer'd my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish: I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter,
That neither singly can be manifested,
Without the show of both; fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene: the image of the jest
I'll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host.
To-night at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen;
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry: she hath consented: Now, sir,
Her mother, ever strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the deanery, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her: to this her mother's plot
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white,
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him: her mother hath intended,
The better to denote her to the doctor,
For they must all be mask'd and vizarded,
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Both, my good host, to go along with me:
And here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.
Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar:
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I'll make a present recompense.
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and the
Against such lewdsters and their lechery
Those that betray them do no treachery.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys.
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap:
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry:
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die:
I'll wink and couch: no man their works must eye.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy:
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out:
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room:
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower:
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring:
The expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write
In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white;
Let sapphire, pearl and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee:
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away; disperse: but till 'tis one o'clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband? do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
The offence is holy that she hath committed;
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy:
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state;
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.
Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
