Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star-
Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and
Ay, and 'Rato-lorum' too; and a gentleman born,
Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
All his successors gone before him hath done't; and
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old coat.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Yes, py'r lady; if he has a quarter of your coat,
John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto
The council shall bear it; it is a riot.
It is not meet the council hear a riot; there is no
Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that
I am glad to see your worships well.
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he
It could not be judged, sir.
You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault;
Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that
Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and
But not kissed your keeper's daughter?
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
I will answer it straight; I have done all this.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Good worts! good cabbage. Slender, I broke your
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice! that's my humour.
Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
We three, to hear it and end it between them.
Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note-
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'He
Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might
No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Word of denial in thy labras here!
Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
What say you, Scarlet and John?
Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunk
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; and
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
How now, Simple! where have you been? I must wait
Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to Alice
Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last, a fortnight
Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word with
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so,
I shall do that that is reason.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray
But that is not the question: the question is
Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne Page.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?
I will do a greater thing than that, upon your
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do
I will marry her, sir, at your request: but if there
I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt:
I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discretion answer; save the fall is in
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his
I may not go in without your worship: they will not
I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much as
I pray you, sir, walk in.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised
I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.
I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at
That's meat and drink to me, now. I have seen
Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by
Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.
Nay, pray you, lead the way.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
Not I, sir; pray you, keep on.
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it
Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire
Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone: I will
What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier: let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a week.
Thou'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I
I have spoke; let him follow.
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.
Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade:
It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.
O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?
He was gotten in drink: is not the humour conceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox: his
The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must shift.
Which of you know Ford of this town?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two
He hath studied her will, and translated her will,
The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.
The humour rises; it is good: humour me the angels.
I have writ me here a letter to her: and here
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
I thank thee for that humour.
O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a
Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!
I will run no base humour: here, take the
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
Trudge, plod away o' the hoof; seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.
Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
I have operations which be humours of revenge.
I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
And I to Ford shall eke unfold
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to
Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee; troop on.
What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement,
Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find any
God's patience and the king's English.
Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in
An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant
Ay, for fault of a better.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with a
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands
How say you? O, I should remember him: does he not
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell
Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
Out, alas! here comes my master.
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man;
What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say!
Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt
And down, down, adown-a,  & c.
Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you,
Ay, forsooth; I'll fetch it you.
I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found
Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,
By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me!
Qu'ai-j'oublie! dere is some simples in my closet,
Ay me, he'll find the young man here, and be mad!
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!
The young man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth
Ay, forsooth; to desire her to--
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to
This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
You shall have An fool's-head of your own. No, I
Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.
How now, good woman? how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.
What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose my suit?
Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but
Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such
Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money
Will I? i'faith, that we will; and I will tell your
Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
Truly, an honest gentleman: but Anne loves him not;
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-
Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him
For thee to fight,    JOHN FALSTAFF'
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What
Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.
And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very
Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to the contrary.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.
Well, I do then; yet I say I could show you to the
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I
Hang the trifle, woman! take the honour. What is
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights
We burn daylight: here, read, read; perceive how I
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this mystery
Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the very
Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to
So will I	if he come under my hatches, I'll never
Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too: he's
Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
Well, I hope it be not so.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night:
Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing.
Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.
He loves your wife; there's the short and the long.
My name is Corporal Nym; I speak and I avouch; 'tis
Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese,
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
If I do find it: well.
I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest
Whither go you, George? Hark you.
How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George.
Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
Go in with us and see: we have an hour's talk with
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
Do you think there is truth in them?
Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes:
How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
Tell him, cavaleiro-justice; tell him, bully-rook.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
Good mine host o' the Garter, a word with you.
Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my
None, I protest: but I'll give you a pottle of
My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress;
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times
I know not what: 'tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis
Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag?
Have with you. I would rather hear them scold than fight.
Though Page be a secure fool, an stands so firmly
I will look further into't: and I have a disguise
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why, then the world's mine oyster.
Which I with sword will open.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should
Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took't upon
Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteen pence?
Reason, you rogue, reason: thinkest thou I'll
You'll not bear a letter for me, you rogue! you
I do relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.
Not so, an't please your worship.
As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Two thousand, fair woman: and I'll vouchsafe thee
There is one Mistress Ford, sir:--I pray, come a
Well, on: Mistress Ford, you say,--
Your worship says very true: I pray your worship,
I warrant thee, nobody hears; mine own people, mine
Are they so? God bless them and make them his servants!
Well, Mistress Ford; what of her?
Why, sir, she's a good creature. Lord Lord! your
Marry, this is the short and the long of it; you
But what says she to me? be brief, my good
Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I will
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to
Not I, I assure thee: setting the attractions of my
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Ford's wife and
Page's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
That were a jest indeed! they have not so little
Mistress Page would desire you to send her your
Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
Windsor leads a better life than she does: do what
Nay, but do so, then: and, look you, he may come and
Fare thee well: commend me to them both: there's
This punk is one of Cupid's carriers:
Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
Sayest thou so, old Jack? go thy ways; I'll make
Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would fain
Such Brooks are welcome to me, that o'erflow such
And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
I make bold to press with so little preparation upon
You're welcome. What's your will? Give us leave, drawer.
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much; my name is Brook.
Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours: not to charge you;
Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me:
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.
I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
Speak, good Master Brook: I shall be glad to be
Sir, I hear you are a scholar,--I will be brief
There is a gentlewoman in this town; her husband's
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you,
I am sure, I have received none; unless experience
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.'
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
Of what quality was your love, then?
Like a fair house built on another man's ground; so
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
When I have told you that, I have told you all.
Some say, that though she appear honest to me, yet in
John, here is the heart of my purpose: you are a
Believe it, for you know it. There is money; spend
Ford's wife: use your art of wooing; win her to
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on
Master Brook, I will first make bold with your
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall want
I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford,
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not:
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will
Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his style;
What a damned Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is
Cuckold! Wittol!--Cuckold! the devil himself hath
I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it;
Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come; he
Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.
He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would kill
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.
Take your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee
AEsculapius? my Galen? my heart of elder? ha! is
By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld; he
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece, my boy!
I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six or
He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of
Is it not true, Master Page?
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am sworn of
Pardon, guest-justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de
Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
That is, he will make thee amends.
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me;
And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
And, moreover, bully,--but first, master guest, and
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
He is there: see what humour he is in; and I will
By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a
Let him die: sheathe thy impatience, throw cold
Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting; and thou
By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you;
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
I pray you now, good master Slender's serving-man,
Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward, every
I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
There will we make our peds of roses,
Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
When as I sat in Pabylon--
Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master
Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over
Pray you, give me my gown; or else keep it in your arms.
How now, master Parson! Good morrow, good Sir Hugh.
Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
What, the sword and the word! do you study them
And youthful still! in your doublet and hose this
There is reasons and causes for it.
We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
I think you know him; Master Doctor Caius, the
Got's will, and his passion of my heart! I had as
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen,
I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder:
Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon.
So do you, good master doctor.
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
I will knog your urinals about your knave's cockscomb
Diable! Jack Rugby,--mine host de Jarteer,--have I
As I am a Christians soul now, look you, this is the
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.
Peace, I say! hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
Hugh? no; he gives me the proverbs and the
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of
This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, follow.
Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to
I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man
O, you are a flattering boy: now I see you'll be a courtier.
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want
Be sure of that,--two other husbands.
Where had you this pretty weather-cock?
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such a
By your leave, sir: I am sick till I see her.
Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any
Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as
Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots, they are laid;
Well; I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and
The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me
Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home;
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine with
Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and
I hope I have your good will, father Page.
You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you:
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a
What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me
Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.
Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
Have with you to see this monster.
I warrant. What, Robin, I say!
Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you?
My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door,
Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
Ay, I'll be sworn. My master knows not of your
Thou'rt a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
Go to, then: we'll use this unwholesome humidity,
Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel? Why, now let
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate,
Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would
I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady!
Let the court of France show me such another. I see
A plain kerchief, Sir John: my brows become nothing
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so: thou
Believe me, there is no such thing in me.
What made me love thee? let that persuade thee
Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love Mistress Page.
Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the
Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek
Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you shall one
Keep in that mind; I'll deserve it.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could not
Mistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing and
She shall not see me: I will ensconce me behind the arras.
Pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman.
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're shamed,
What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
O well-a-day, Mistress Ford! having an honest man
What cause of suspicion! Out pon you! how am I
Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all the
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man
What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear
For shame! never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
What, Sir John Falstaff! Are these your letters, knight?
I love thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.
Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
Go take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the
Pray you, come near: if I suspect without cause,
I deserve it. How now! whither bear you this?
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You
Buck! I would I could wash myself of the buck!
Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck; I warrant you, buck;
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night; I'll tell you my
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.
True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen: you shall see
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.
Is there not a double excellency in this?
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who
I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of
Falstaff's being here; for I never saw him so gross
I will lay a plot to try that; and we will yet have
Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the
We will do it: let him be sent for to-morrow,
I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of that
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.
If there be any pody in the house, and in the
By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as
By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in
Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
If dere be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy
Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart!
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
I see I cannot get thy father's love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
He doth object I am too great of birth--,
And that, my state being gall'd with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth:
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My riots past, my wild societies;
And tells me 'tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.
May be he tells you true.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth
Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne:
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags;
And 'tis the very riches of thyself
Yet seek my father's love; still seek it, sir:
Cannot attain it, why, then,--hark you hither!
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly: my kinsman shall
I'll make a shaft or a bolt on't: 'slid, 'tis but
No, she shall not dismay me: I care not for that,
Hark ye; Master Slender would speak a word with you.
O, what a world of vile ill-favor'd faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.
She's coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell you
Anne the jest, how my father stole two geese out of
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman in
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that good
My will! 'od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne.
Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house:
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
She is no match for you.
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all cheques, rebukes and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love
And not retire: let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i' the earth
And bowl'd to death with turnips!
Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in;
This is my doing, now: 'Nay,' said I, 'will you cast
Master Fenton:' this is my doing.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-night
Give my sweet Nan this ring: there's for thy pains.
Now heaven send thee good fortune!
A kind heart he hath: a woman would run through
Master Slender had her; or, in sooth, I would Master
Fenton had her; I will do what I can for them all
I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from
Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in't.
Have I lived to be carried in a basket, like a
Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick,
I'll have my brains ta'en out and buttered, and give
Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.
Let me pour in some sack to the Thames water; for my
By your leave; I cry you mercy: give your worship
Take away these chalices. Go brew me a pottle of
Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.
Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough; I was thrown
Alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault:
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's promise.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn
Well, I will visit her: tell her so; and bid her
Do so. Between nine and ten, sayest thou?
Well, be gone: I will not miss her.
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me word
Now, master Brook, you come to know what hath passed
That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
Master Brook, I will not lie to you: I was at her
How so, sir? Did she change her determination?
No, Master Brook; but the peaking Cornuto her
And did he search for you, and could not find you?
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes
By the Lord, a buck-basket! rammed me in with foul
And how long lay you there?
Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have
Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple of Ford's
Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders; met
And in the height of this bath, when I was more than
In good sadness, I am sorry that for my sake you
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment.
Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall
Hum! ha! is this a vision? is this a dream? do I
This 'tis to be married! this 'tis to have linen
Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
Sure he is by this, or will be presently: but,
I'll be with her by and by; I'll but bring my young
How now, Sir Hugh! no school to-day?
No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in
Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
William, how many numbers is in nouns?
Truly, I thought there had been one number more,
Peace your tattlings! What is 'fair,' William?
Polecats! there are fairer things than polecats, sure.
You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.
And what is 'a stone,' William?
No, it is 'lapis:' I pray you, remember in your prain.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that
Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark:
I pray you, have your remembrance, child,
Leave your prabbles, 'oman. What is the focative
What is your genitive case plural, William?
Vengeance of Jenny's case! fie on her! never name
You do ill to teach the child such words: he
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.
It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your 'quies,'
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.
Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my
Step into the chamber, Sir John.
How now, sweetheart! who's at home besides yourself?
Why, none but mine own people.
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again:
Why, does he talk of him?
Of none but him; and swears he was carried out, the
How near is he, Mistress Page?
Hard by; at street end; he will be here anon.
I am undone! The knight is here.
Why then you are utterly shamed, and he's but a dead
Which way should be go? how should I bestow him?
Shall I put him into the basket again?
No, I'll come no more i' the basket. May I not go
Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the door
What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.
There they always use to discharge their
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir
John. Unless you go out disguised--
Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's gown
Good hearts, devise something: any extremity rather
My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a
On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he
Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will
Quick, quick! we'll come dress you straight: put
I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he
Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel, and the
Ah, in good sadness, is he; and talks of the basket
We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men to carry the
Nay, but he'll be here presently: let's go dress him
I'll first direct my men what they shall do with the
Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse him enough.
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders:
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.
I hope not; I had as lief bear so much lead.
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any
O you panderly rascals! there's a knot, a ging, a
Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching!
Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go
Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog!
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford the honest
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in
Well said, brazen-face! hold it out. Come forth, sirrah!
Are you not ashamed? let the clothes alone.
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed
Pluck me out all the linen.
If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's death.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
Well, he's not here I seek for.
No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
Help to search my house this one time. If I find
What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and the old woman
Old woman! what old woman's that?
Nay, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not
Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let him
Come, Mother Prat; come, give me your hand.
Out of my door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, you
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the
Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
By the yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witch
I spy a great peard under his muffler.
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow;
Let's obey his humour a little further: come,
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
Nay, by the mass, that he did not; he beat him most
I'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o'er the
What think you? may we, with the warrant of
The spirit of wantonness is, sure, scared out of
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed: and
Come, to the forge with it then; shape it: I would
Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.
They shall have my horses; but I'll make them pay;
I'll sauce them: they have had my house a week at
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
Within a quarter of an hour.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt;
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand
In him that was of late an heretic,
Be not as extreme in submission
But let our plot go forward: let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.
How? to send him word they'll meet him in the park
You say he has been thrown in the rivers and has
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest,
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns;
And there he blasts the tree and takes the cattle
And makes milch-kine yield blood and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner:
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
Received and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak:
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come:
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? what is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter and my little son
And three or four more of their growth we'll dress
Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands: upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song: upon their sight,
We two in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about
And, fairy-like, to-pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.
We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
Be practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.
I will teach the children their behaviors; and I
That will be excellent. I'll go and buy them vizards.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy.
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
Nay I'll to him again in name of Brook
He'll tell me all his purpose: sure, he'll come.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
Let us about it: it is admirable pleasures and fery
Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.
I'll to the doctor: he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well money'd, and his friends
Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin?
Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff
There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his
Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: I'll
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with
Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of
Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell: what would you with her?
My master, sir, Master Slender, sent to her, seeing
I spake with the old woman about it.
And what says she, I pray, sir?
Marry, she says that the very same man that
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself;
I had other things to have spoken with her too from
What are they? let us know.
I may not conceal them, sir.
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne
Page; to know if it were my master's fortune to
To have her, or no. Go; say the woman told me so.
May I be bold to say so, sir?
Ay, sir; like who more bold.
I thank your worship: I shall make my master glad
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath taught
Out, alas, sir! cozenage, mere cozenage!
Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I came
They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do not
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a
Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat
Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight. I am
I would all the world might be cozened; for I have
The devil take one party and his dam the other! and
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant;
What tellest thou me of black and blue? I was
Brentford: but that my admirable dexterity of wit,
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber: you
Sure, one of you does not serve heaven well, that
Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy: I
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will at the
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
Who mutually hath answer'd my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish: I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter,
That neither singly can be manifested,
Without the show of both; fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene: the image of the jest
I'll show you here at large. Hark, good mine host.
To-night at Herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen;
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry: she hath consented: Now, sir,
Her mother, ever strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the deanery, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her: to this her mother's plot
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white,
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him: her mother hath intended,
The better to denote her to the doctor,
For they must all be mask'd and vizarded,
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Both, my good host, to go along with me:
And here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.
Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar:
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I'll make a present recompense.
Prithee, no more prattling; go. I'll hold. This is
I'll provide you a chain; and I'll do what I can to
Away, I say; time wears: hold up your head, and mince.
How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter
Park about midnight, at Herne's oak, and you shall
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor
Master Brook, that ever governed frenzy. I will tell
Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged, and I
Strange things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.
Come, come; we'll couch i' the castle-ditch till we
Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her and we have a
That's good too: but what needs either your 'mum'
The night is dark; light and spirits will become it
Master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of
Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and the
They are all couched in a pit hard by Herne's oak,
Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once
That cannot choose but amaze him.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; if he be
Against such lewdsters and their lechery
Those that betray them do no treachery.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts:
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute
Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa; love
Windsor stag; and the fattest, I think, i' the
Sir John! art thou there, my deer? my male deer?
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
Sleeves, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes; let
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch: I will
Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the hunter?
Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys.
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap:
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry:
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die:
I'll wink and couch: no man their works must eye.
Where's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy:
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out:
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room:
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower:
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring:
The expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And 'Honi soit qui mal y pense' write
In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white;
Let sapphire, pearl and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee:
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away; disperse: but till 'tis one o'clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he
Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
Come, will this wood take fire?
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband? do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
Now, sir, who's a cuckold now? Master Brook,
Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his
Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never meet.
I will never take you for my love again; but I will
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
Ay, and an ox too: both the proofs are extant.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
I will never mistrust my wife again till thou art
Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it, that
Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.
Why Sir John, do you think, though we would have the
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as wicked as his wife?
And given to fornications, and to taverns and sack
Well, I am your theme: you have the start of me; I
Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor, to one
Master Brook, that you have cozened of money, to
Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset
Master Slender hath married her daughter.
Son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched?
Dispatched! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page,
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
I went to her in white, and cried 'mum,' and she
Good George, be not angry: I knew of your purpose;
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha'
Why, did you take her in green?
Ay, by gar, and 'tis a boy: by gar, I'll raise all Windsor.
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
Pardon, good father! good my mother, pardon!
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?
Why went you not with master doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
The offence is holy that she hath committed;
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy:
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state;
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand to
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.
Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
Let it be so. Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
