I learn in this letter that Don Peter of Arragon
He is very near by this: he was not three leagues off
How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
But few of any sort, and none of name.
A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings
Much deserved on his part and equally remembered by
Don Pedro: he hath borne himself beyond the
He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much
I have already delivered him letters, and there
Did he break out into tears?
A kind overflow of kindness: there are no faces
I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned from the
I know none of that name, lady: there was none such
What is he that you ask for, niece?
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
O, he's returned; and as pleasant as ever he was.
He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged
Cupid at the flight; and my uncle's fool, reading
Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much;
He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it:
And a good soldier too, lady.
And a good soldier to a lady: but what is he to a lord?
A lord to a lord, a man to a man; stuffed with all
It is so, indeed; he is no less than a stuffed man:
You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a
Alas! he gets nothing by that. In our last
Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as
I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
No; an he were, I would burn my study. But, I pray
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he
I will hold friends with you, lady.
You will never run mad, niece.
No, not till a hot January.
Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your
Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of
You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this
Her mother hath many times told me so.
Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
Signior Benedick, no; for then were you a child.
You have it full, Benedick: we may guess by this
If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not
I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior
What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
Is it possible disdain should die while she hath
Courtesy itself must convert to disdain, if you come
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I
A dear happiness to women: they would else have
God keep your ladyship still in that mind! so some
Scratching could not make it worse, an 'twere such
Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and
You always end with a jade's trick: I know you of old.
That is the sum of all, Leonato. Signior Claudio
If you swear, my lord, you shall not be forsworn.
Let me bid you welcome, my lord: being reconciled to
I thank you: I am not of many words, but I thank
Please it your grace lead on?
Your hand, Leonato; we will go together.
Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?
I noted her not; but I looked on her.
Is she not a modest young lady?
Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for
No; I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high
Thou thinkest I am in sport: I pray thee tell me
Would you buy her, that you inquire after her?
Can the world buy such a jewel?
Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this
In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I
I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such
I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the
Is't come to this? In faith, hath not the world
Shall I never see a bachelor of three-score again?
Go to, i' faith; an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck
Sundays. Look Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
What secret hath held you here, that you followed
I would your grace would constrain me to tell.
I charge thee on thy allegiance.
You hear, Count Claudio: I can be secret as a dumb
Mark how short his answer is;--With Hero, Leonato's
If this were so, so were it uttered.
Like the old tale, my lord: 'it is not so, nor
If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it
Amen, if you love her; for the lady is very well worthy.
You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
By my troth, I speak my thought.
And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.
And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
That I love her, I feel.
That she is worthy, I know.
That I neither feel how she should be loved nor
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite
And never could maintain his part but in the force
That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she
I may go the finer, I will live a bachelor.
I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.
With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord,
Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot
Well, as time shall try: 'In time the savage bull
The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible
Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set
If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in
Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
I look for an earthquake too, then.
Well, you temporize with the hours. In the
Leonato's: commend me to him and tell him I will
I have almost matter enough in me for such an
To the tuition of God: From my house, if I had it,--
The sixth of July: Your loving friend, Benedick.
Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your
My liege, your highness now may do me good.
My love is thine to teach: teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
Any hard lesson that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any son, my lord?
No child but Hero; she's his only heir.
When you went onward on this ended action,
I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand
Than to drive liking to the name of love:
But now I am return'd and that war-thoughts
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying, I liked her ere I went to wars.
Thou wilt be like a lover presently
And tire the hearer with a book of words.
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her and with her father,
And thou shalt have her. Was't not to this end
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
How sweetly you do minister to love,
That know love's grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salved it with a longer treatise.
What need the bridge much broader than the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity.
Look, what will serve is fit: 'tis once, thou lovest,
And I will fit thee with the remedy.
I know we shall have revelling to-night:
I will assume thy part in some disguise
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
Then after to her father will I break;
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine.
In practise let us put it presently.
How now, brother! Where is my cousin, your son?
He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell
As the event stamps them: but they have a good
Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
A good sharp fellow: I will send for him; and
No, no; we will hold it as a dream till it appear
Cousins, you know what you have to do. O, I cry you
What the good-year, my lord! why are you thus out
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds;
And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?
If not a present remedy, at least a patient
I wonder that thou, being, as thou sayest thou art,
Yea, but you must not make the full show of this
I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in
Can you make no use of your discontent?
I make all use of it, for I use it only.
I came yonder from a great supper: the prince your
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on?
What is he for a fool that betroths himself to
Marry, it is your brother's right hand.
A proper squire! And who, and who? which way looks
Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?
Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoking a
Come, come, let us thither: this may prove food to
Let us to the great supper: their cheer is the
Was not Count John here at supper?
How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see
He is of a very melancholy disposition.
He were an excellent man that were made just in the
Then half Signior Benedick's tongue in Count John's
With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money
By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a
Too curst is more than curst: I shall lessen God's
So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.
Just, if he send me no husband; for the which
You may light on a husband that hath no beard.
What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel
Well, then, go you into hell?
No, but to the gate; and there will the devil meet
I up my apes, and away to Saint Peter for the
Yes, faith; it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy
Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
Not till God make men of some other metal than
No, uncle, I'll none: Adam's sons are my brethren;
Daughter, remember what I told you: if the prince
The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be
I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church by daylight.
The revellers are entering, brother: make good room.
Lady, will you walk about with your friend?
So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing,
I am yours for the walk; and especially when I walk away.
I may say so, when I please.
And when please you to say so?
When I like your favour; for God defend the lute
My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
Why, then, your visor should be thatched.
Speak low, if you speak love.
Well, I would you did like me.
So would not I, for your own sake; for I have many
I love you the better: the hearers may cry, Amen.
God match me with a good dancer!
And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is
No more words: the clerk is answered.
I know you well enough; you are Signior Antonio.
At a word, I am not.
I know you by the waggling of your head.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
You could never do him so ill-well, unless you were
At a word, I am not.
Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your
Will you not tell me who told you so?
Nor will you not tell me who you are?
That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit
I am sure you know him well enough.
Did he never make you laugh?
I pray you, what is he?
Why, he is the prince's jester: a very dull fool;
When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.
Do, do: he'll but break a comparison or two on me;
Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath
The ladies follow her and but one visor remains.
And that is Claudio: I know him by his bearing.
You know me well; I am he.
Signior, you are very near my brother in his love:
How know you he loves her?
I heard him swear his affection.
So did I too; and he swore he would marry her to-night.
Come, let us to the banquet.
Thus answer I in the name of Benedick,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.
Friendship is constant in all other things
Save in the office and affairs of love:
Therefore, all hearts in love use their own tongues;
Let every eye negotiate for itself
And trust no agent; for beauty is a witch
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, Hero!
Come, will you go with me?
Even to the next willow, about your own business,
I wish him joy of her.
Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier: so they
Ho! now you strike like the blind man: 'twas the
If it will not be, I'll leave you.
Alas, poor hurt fowl! now will he creep into sedges.
But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not
Now, signior, where's the count? did you see him?
Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame.
I found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a
To be whipped! What's his fault?
The flat transgression of a schoolboy, who, being
Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made,
I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to
If their singing answer your saying, by my faith,
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you: the
O, she misused me past the endurance of a block!
Will your grace command me any service to the
I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the
Prester John's foot, fetch you a hair off the great
Cham's beard, do you any embassage to the Pigmies,
None, but to desire your good company.
O God, sir, here's a dish I love not: I cannot
Come, lady, come; you have lost the heart of
Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile; and I gave
You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.
So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I
Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.
Why, how now, count! wherefore are you sad?
The count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor
I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true;
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my
Silence is the perfectest herald of joy: I were
Speak, cousin; or, if you cannot, stop his mouth
In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
Yea, my lord; I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on
Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
I would rather have one of your father's getting.
Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? Your
No, my lord, unless I might have another for
Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best
No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there
Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
I cry you mercy, uncle. By your grace's pardon.
By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
There's little of the melancholy element in her, my
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
O, by no means: she mocks all her wooers out of suit.
She were an excellent wife for Benedict.
O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married,
County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
To-morrow, my lord: time goes on crutches till love
Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing:
Hercules' labours; which is, to bring Signior
Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of
My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten
I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my
And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that
I know. Thus far can I praise him; he is of a noble
Cupid is no longer an archer: hi s glory shall be
It is so; the Count Claudio shall marry the
Yea, my lord; but I can cross it.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be
Not honestly, my lord; but so covertly that no
I think I told your lordship a year since, how much
I am in the favour of Margaret, the waiting
I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night,
What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage?
The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to
Claudio--whose estimation do you mightily hold
What proof shall I make of that?
Proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex Claudio,
Only to despite them, I will endeavour any thing.
Go, then; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and
Claudio; and bring them to see this the very night
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put
Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
In my chamber-window lies a book: bring it hither
I know that; but I would have thee hence, and here again.
I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
I'll take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster
Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbour.
Come, shall we hear this music?
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony!
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
O, very well, my lord: the music ended,
We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
To slander music any more than once.
It is the witness still of excellency
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing;
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he swear he loves.
Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument,
There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks;
Now, divine air! now is his soul ravished! Is it
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,
One foot in sea and one on shore,
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonny,
Converting all your sounds of woe
Sing no more ditties, sing no moe,
Of dumps so dull and heavy;
The fraud of men was ever so,
Then sigh not so,  & c.
By my troth, a good song.
And an ill singer, my lord.
Ha, no, no, faith; thou singest well enough for a shift.
An he had been a dog that should have howled thus,
Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee,
The best I can, my lord.
Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of
O, ay: stalk on. stalk on; the fowl sits. I did
No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she
Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think
May be she doth but counterfeit.
O God, counterfeit! There was never counterfeit of
Why, what effects of passion shows she?
Bait the hook well; this fish will bite.
What effects, my lord? She will sit you, you heard
How, how, pray you? You amaze me: I would have I
I would have sworn it had, my lord; especially
I should think this a gull, but that the
He hath ta'en the infection: hold it up.
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
No; and swears she never will: that's her torment.
I,' says she, 'that have so oft encountered him
This says she now when she is beginning to write to
Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a
O, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she
O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence;
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs,
She doth indeed; my daughter says so: and the
It were good that Benedick knew of it by some
To what end? He would make but a sport of it and
An he should, it were an alms to hang him. She's an
In every thing but in loving Benedick.
O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me: I would
Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she
She doth well: if she should make tender of her
He is a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
Before God! and, in my mind, very wise.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.
And I take him to be valiant.
As Hector, I assure you: and in the managing of
If he do fear God, a' must necessarily keep peace:
And so will he do; for the man doth fear God,
Never tell him, my lord: let her wear it out with
Nay, that's impossible: she may wear her heart out first.
Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter:
My lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.
If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never
Let there be the same net spread for her; and that
Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take
You take pleasure then in the message?
Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife's
Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor;
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the prince and Claudio:
Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursula
Walk in the orchard and our whole discourse
Is all of her; say that thou overheard'st us;
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where honeysuckles, ripen'd by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter, like favourites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it: there will she hide her,
To listen our purpose.  This is thy office;
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
I'll make her come, I warrant you, presently.
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit:
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made,
For look where Beatrice, like a lapwing, runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice; who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful;
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the prince and my new-trothed lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
O god of love! I know he doth deserve
As much as may be yielded to a man:
But Nature never framed a woman's heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice;
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly that to her
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward: if fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antique,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agate very vilely cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable:
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick, like cover'd fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it: hear what she will say.
No; rather I will go to Benedick
And counsel him to fight against his passion.
And, truly, I'll devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with: one doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.
O, do not do your cousin such a wrong.
She cannot be so much without true judgment--
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prized to have--as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
He is the only man of Italy.
I pray you, be not angry with me, madam,
For shape, for bearing, argument and valour,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it.
Why, every day, to-morrow. Come, go in:
I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
She's limed, I warrant you: we have caught her, madam.
If it proves so, then loving goes by haps:
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band;
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and
I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss
Gallants, I am not as I have been.
So say I	methinks you are sadder.
I hope he be in love.
Hang him, truant! there's no true drop of blood in
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
Where is but a humour or a worm.
Well, every one can master a grief but he that has
Yet say I, he is in love.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no
Hath any man seen him at the barber's?
No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him,
Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
Nay, a' rubs himself with civet: can you smell him
That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
And when was he wont to wash his face?
Yea, or to paint himself? for the which, I hear
Nay, but his jesting spirit; which is now crept into
Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude,
Nay, but I know who loves him.
That would I know too: I warrant, one that knows him not.
Yes, and his ill conditions; and, in despite of
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice.
My lord and brother, God save you!
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
If it please you: yet Count Claudio may hear; for
I know not that, when he knows what I know.
If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
You may think I love you not: let that appear
I came hither to tell you; and, circumstances
Even she; Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero:
The word is too good to paint out her wickedness; I
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not
If I see any thing to-night why I should not marry
And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join
I will disparage her no farther till you are my
O plague right well prevented! so will you say when
Are you good men and true?
Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if
Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.
First, who think you the most desertless man to be
Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole; for they can
Come hither, neighbour Seacole. God hath blessed
You have: I knew it would be your answer. Well,
How if a' will not stand?
Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go; and
If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none
True, and they are to meddle with none but the
We will rather sleep than talk: we know what
Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet
Why, then, let them alone till they are sober: if
If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue
If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay
Truly, by your office, you may; but I think they
You have been always called a merciful man, partner.
Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more
If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
Why, then, depart in peace, and let the child wake
This is the end of the charge:--you, constable, are
Nay, by'r our lady, that I think a' cannot.
Five shillings to one on't, with any man that knows
By'r lady, I think it be so.
Ha, ha, ha! Well, masters, good night: an there be
Well, masters, we hear our charge: let us go sit here
One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you watch
Adieu: be vigitant, I beseech you.
Here, man; I am at thy elbow.
Mass, and my elbow itched; I thought there would a
I will owe thee an answer for that: and now forward
Stand thee close, then, under this pent-house, for
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.
Is it possible that any villany should be so dear?
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any
That shows thou art unconfirmed. Thou knowest that
Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
Tush! I may as well say the fool's the fool. But
No; 'twas the vane on the house.
Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this
All this I see; and I see that the fashion wears
Not so, neither: but know that I have to-night
John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter.
And thought they Margaret was Hero?
Two of them did, the prince and Claudio; but the
Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged; swore
We charge you, in the prince's name, stand!
Call up the right master constable. We have here
And one Deformed is one of them: I know him; a'
You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.
Never speak: we charge you let us obey you to go with us.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken
A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, we'll obey you.
Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire
Troth, I think your other rabato were better.
No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this.
By my troth, 's not so good; and I warrant your
My cousin's a fool, and thou art another: I'll wear
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair
By my troth, 's but a night-gown in respect of
God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is
Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not
Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?
I am out of all other tune, methinks.
Clap's into 'Light o' love;' that goes without a
Ye light o' love, with your heels! then, if your
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
For the letter that begins them all, H.
Well, and you be not turned Turk, there's no more
Nothing I; but God send every one their heart's desire!
These gloves the count sent me; they are an
I am stuffed, cousin; I cannot smell.
A maid, and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.
O, God help me! God help me! how long have you
Even since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?
It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your
Get you some of this distilled Carduus Benedictus,
There thou prickest her with a thistle.
Benedictus! why Benedictus? you have some moral in
Moral! no, by my troth, I have no moral meaning; I
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
Madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, Signior
Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the
Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
What would you with me, honest neighbour?
Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you
Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.
What is it, my good friends?
Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the
Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living
Comparisons are odorous: palabras, neighbour Verges.
It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the
All thy tediousness on me, ah?
Yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis; for
I hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any
I would fain know what you have to say.
Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your
A good old man, sir; he will be talking: as they
Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.
One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed
Take their examination yourself and bring it me: I
Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.
My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to
I'll wait upon them: I am ready.
Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole;
And we must do it wisely.
We will spare for no wit, I warrant you; here's
Come, Friar Francis, be brief; only to the plain
You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady.
To be married to her: friar, you come to marry her.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this count.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you
I dare make his answer, none.
O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily
How now! interjections? Why, then, some be of
Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid, your daughter?
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back, whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again.
Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
There, Leonato, take her back again:
Give not this rotten orange to your friend;
She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O, what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
What do you mean, my lord?
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity,--
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the 'forehand sin:
I never tempted her with word too large;
But, as a brother to his sister, show'd
And seem'd I ever otherwise to you?
Out on thee! Seeming! I will write against it:
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pamper'd animals
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet prince, why speak not you?
I stand dishonour'd, that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
This looks not like a nuptial.
Is this the prince? is this the prince's brother?
Is this face Hero's? are our eyes our own?
All this is so: but what of this, my lord?
Let me but move one question to your daughter;
And, by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
O, God defend me! how am I beset!
What kind of catechising call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.
What man was he talk'd with you yesternight
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord.
Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honour,
Myself, my brother and this grieved count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confess'd the vile encounters they have had
Fie, fie! they are not to be named, my lord,
There is not chastity enough in language
Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been,
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell,
Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.
Hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand.
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live, Hero; do not ope thine eyes:
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugal nature's frame?
O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates,
Who smirch'd thus and mired with infamy,
I might have said 'No part of it is mine;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins'?
But mine and mine I loved and mine I praised
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her,--why, she, O, she is fallen
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again
And salt too little which may season give
For my part, I am so attired in wonder,
I know not what to say.
O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No, truly not; although, until last night,
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.
Confirm'd, confirm'd! O, that is stronger made
Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron!
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that, speaking of her foulness,
Wash'd it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.
For I have only been silent so long
And given way unto this course of fortune.
By noting of the lady I have mark'd
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes;
And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire,
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool;
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenor of my book; trust not my age,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
A sin of perjury; she not denies it:
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me; I know none:
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
There is some strange misprision in the princes.
Two of them have the very bent of honour;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practise of it lives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.
I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honour,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
Ability in means and choice of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here the princes left for dead:
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed;
And on your family's old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
What shall become of this? what will this do?
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse; that is some good:
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth.
She dying, as it must so be maintain'd,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied and excused
Of every hearer: for it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lack'd and lost,
Why, then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit,
More moving-delicate and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she lived indeed; then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her,
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be levell'd false,
The supposition of the lady's death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy:
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you:
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
Come, lady, die to live: this wedding-day
Perhaps is but prolong'd: have patience and endure.
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
You have no reason; I do it freely.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!
Is there any way to show such friendship?
A very even way, but no such friend.
It is a man's office, but not yours.
I do love nothing in the world so well as you: is
As strange as the thing I know not. It were as
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Do not swear, and eat it.
I will swear by it that you love me; and I will make
Will you not eat your word?
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest
You have stayed me in a happy hour: I was about to
And do it with all thy heart.
I love you with so much of my heart that none is
Come, bid me do any thing for thee.
Ha! not for the wide world.
You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
I am gone, though I am here: there is no love in
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that
Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying!
Sweet Hero! She is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
Princes and counties! Surely, a princely testimony,
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Enough, I am engaged; I will challenge him. I will
Claudio shall render me a dear account. As you
O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
Marry, that am I and my partner.
Nay, that's certain; we have the exhibition to examine.
But which are the offenders that are to be
Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your
Pray, write down, Borachio. Yours, sirrah?
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.
Write down, master gentleman Conrade. Masters, do
Write down, that they hope they serve God: and
Marry, sir, we say we are none.
A marvellous witty fellow, I assure you: but I
Sir, I say to you we are none.
Well, stand aside. 'Fore God, they are both in a
Master constable, you go not the way to examine:
Yea, marry, that's the eftest way. Let the watch
This man said, sir, that Don John, the prince's
Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat
Pray thee, fellow, peace: I do not like thy look,
What heard you him say else?
Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of
Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
Flat burglary as ever was committed.
Yea, by mass, that it is.
And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to
O villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting
And this is more, masters, than you can deny.
Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away;
Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner
Master constable, let these men be bound, and
Let them be in the hands--
God's my life, where's the sexton? let him write
Away! you are an ass, you are an ass.
Dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not
I am a wise fellow, and, which is more, an officer,
Messina, and one that knows the law, go to; and a
I had been writ down an ass!
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself:
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
I pray thee, cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve: give not me counsel;
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine,
And bid him speak of patience;
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
Bid sorrow wag, cry 'hem!' when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
With candle-wasters; bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience.
But there is no such man: for, brother, men
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air and agony with words:
No, no; 'tis all men's office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel:
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee, peace. I will be flesh and blood;
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods
And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself;
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
There thou speak'st reason: nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the prince
And all of them that thus dishonour her.
Here comes the prince and Claudio hastily.
Good day to both of you.
Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord:
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
If he could right himself with quarreling,
Some of us would lie low.
Marry, thou dost wrong me; thou dissembler, thou:--
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
If it should give your age such cause of fear:
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
Tush, tush, man; never fleer and jest at me:
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
That I am forced to lay my reverence by
And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors;
O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villany!
You say not right, old man.
I'll prove it on his body, if he dare,
Despite his nice fence and his active practise,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
Away! I will not have to do with you.
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child:
If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed:
But that's no matter; let him kill one first;
Win me and wear me; let him answer me.
Come, follow me, boy; come, sir boy, come, follow me:
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence;
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece;
And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue:
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,--
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death:
But, on my honour, she was charged with nothing
But what was true and very full of proof.
No? Come, brother; away! I will be heard.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
See, see; here comes the man we went to seek.
Welcome, signior: you are almost come to part
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off
Leonato and his brother. What thinkest thou? Had
In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came
We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are
It is in my scabbard: shall I draw it?
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
Never any did so, though very many have been beside
As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou
What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat,
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you
Nay, then, give him another staff: this last was
By this light, he changes more and more: I think
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?
God bless me from a challenge!
I will make it good how you dare, with what you
Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
I' faith, I thank him; he hath bid me to a calf's
Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the
Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday morning;
For the which she wept heartily and said she cared
Yea, that she did: but yet, for all that, an if she
All, all; and, moreover, God saw him when he was
But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on
Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick the
Fare you well, boy: you know my mind. I will leave
Lackbeard there, he and I shall meet: and, till
In most profound earnest; and, I'll warrant you, for
What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his
He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a
But, soft you, let me be: pluck up, my heart, and
Come you, sir: if justice cannot tame you, she
How now? two of my brother's men bound! Borachio
Hearken after their offence, my lord.
Officers, what offence have these men done?
Marry, sir, they have committed false report;
First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I
Rightly reasoned, and in his own division: and, by
Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus
Sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer:
I had rather seal with my death than repeat over
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.
But did my brother set thee on to this?
Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.
He is composed and framed of treachery:
And fled he is upon this villany.
Sweet Hero! now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs: by this time our
Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the
Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
That, when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him: which of these is he?
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
No, not so, villain; thou beliest thyself:
Here stand a pair of honourable men;
A third is fled, that had a hand in it.
I thank you, princes, for my daughter's death:
Record it with your high and worthy deeds:
I know not how to pray your patience;
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin: yet sinn'd I not
And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live;
That were impossible: but, I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died; and if your love
Can labour ought in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb
And sing it to her bones, sing it to-night:
To-morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us:
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me!
I do embrace your offer; and dispose
To-morrow then I will expect your coming;
To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.
No, by my soul, she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath been just and virtuous
In any thing that I do know by her.
Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
I leave an arrant knave with your worship; which I
Farewell, my lords: we look for you to-morrow.
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living
To have no man come over me! why, shall I always
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth; it catches.
And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit,
A most manly wit, Margaret; it will not hurt a
Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
And knows me, and knows me,
I mean in singing; but in loving, Leander the good
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?
Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
I go, let me go with that I came; which is, with
Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense,
I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe
For them all together; which maintained so politic
Suffer love! a good epithet! I do suffer love
In spite of your heart, I think; alas, poor heart!
If you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
It appears not in this confession: there's not one
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in
And how long is that, think you?
Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in
Serve God, love me and mend. There will I leave
Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder's old
Will you go hear this news, signior?
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be
Is this the monument of Leonato?
Done to death by slanderous tongues
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
Gives her fame which never dies.
So the life that died with shame
Lives in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dumb.
Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.
Those that slew thy virgin knight;
For the which, with songs of woe,
Round about her tomb they go.
Help us to sigh and groan,
Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
Now, unto thy bones good night!
Yearly will I do this rite.
Good morrow, masters; put your torches out:
The wolves have prey'd; and look, the gentle day,
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
Thanks to you all, and leave us: fare you well.
Good morrow, masters: each his several way.
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds;
And then to Leonato's we will go.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's
Than this for whom we render'd up this woe.
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the prince and Claudio, who accused her
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
In the true course of all the question.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well, daughter, and you gentle-women all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.
The prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me. You know your office, brother:
You must be father to your brother's daughter
And give her to young Claudio.
Which I will do with confirm'd countenance.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To bind me, or undo me; one of them.
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
That eye my daughter lent her: 'tis most true.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio and the prince: but what's your will?
But, for my will, my will is your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd
In the state of honourable marriage:
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking.
Here comes the prince and Claudio.
Good morrow to this fair assembly.
Good morrow, prince; good morrow, Claudio:
We here attend you. Are you yet determined
To-day to marry with my brother's daughter?
I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
Call her forth, brother; here's the friar ready.
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, what's the matter,
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?
I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
Tush, fear not, man; we'll tip thy horns with gold
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low;
And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow,
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
For this I owe you: here comes other reckonings.
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I do give you her.
Why, then she's mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
No, that you shall not, till you take her hand
Before this friar and swear to marry her.
Give me your hand: before this holy friar,
I am your husband, if you like of me.
And when I lived, I was your other wife:
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify:
When after that the holy rites are ended,
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death:
And to the chapel let us presently.
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
Why, no; no more than reason.
Why, then your uncle and the prince and Claudio
Have been deceived; they swore you did.
Troth, no; no more than reason.
Why, then my cousin Margaret and Ursula
Are much deceived; for they did swear you did.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her;
For here's a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Writ in my cousin's hand, stolen from her pocket,
A miracle! here's our own hands against our hearts.
Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take
I would not deny you; but, by this good day, I yield
Peace! I will stop your mouth.
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?
I'll tell thee what, prince; a college of
I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice,
Come, come, we are friends: let's have a dance ere
First, of my word; therefore play, music. Prince,
My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.
Think not on him till to-morrow:
I'll devise thee brave punishments for him.
