So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I
kill King Pericles; and if I do it not, I am sure to
be hanged at home: 'tis dangerous. Well, I perceive
he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that,
being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired
he might know none of his secrets: now do I see he
had some reason for't; for if a king bid a man be a
villain, he's bound by the indenture of his oath to
be one! Hush! here come the lords of Tyre.
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'll
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that
were cast away before us even now.
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what
pitiful cries they made to us to help them, when,
well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the
porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say
they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them,
they ne'er come but I look to be washed. Master, I
marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the
little ones: I can compare our rich misers to
nothing so fitly as to a whale; a' plays and
tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at
last devours them all at a mouthful: such whales
have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping
till they've swallowed the whole parish, church,
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have
been that day in the belfry.
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I
had been in his belly, I would have kept such a
jangling of the bells, that he should never have
left, till he cast bells, steeple, church, and
parish up again. But if the good King Simonides
We would purge the land of these drones, that rob
Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a day
fits you, search out of the calendar, and nobody
What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in our
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in our
country Greece gets more with begging than we can do
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here's nothing
to be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't.
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here;
come, put it on; keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a
handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and
we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for
fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks,
But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so I
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your
beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office
than to be beadle. But, master, I'll go draw up the
Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for his
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects
the name of good by his government. How far is his
Marry, sir, half a day's journey: and I'll tell
you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her
birth-day; and there are princes and knights come
from all parts of the world to just and tourney for her love.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wish
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a man
cannot get, he may lawfully deal for--his wife's soul.
Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net,
like a poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly
come out. Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and
'tis turned to a rusty armour.
Ay, but hark you, my friend; 'twas we that made up
this garment through the rough seams of the waters:
there are certain condolements, certain vails. I
hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from
We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to
make thee a pair; and I'll bring thee to the court myself.
lists. A pavilion by the side of it for the
reception of King, Princess, Lords,  & c.
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kiss
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,
the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still
observed: and we are strong in custom. Therefore
briefly yield her; for she must overboard straight.
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulked
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Here
she comes weeping for her only mistress' death.
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full of
gallants. We lost too much money this mart by being
We were never so much out of creatures. We have but
poor three, and they can do no more than they can
do; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for
them. If there be not a conscience to be used in
every trade, we shall never prosper.
Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poor
bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven--
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. But
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind
will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
Thou sayest true; they're too unwholesome, o'
conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead, that
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meat
for worms. But I'll go search the market.
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a
proportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to get
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor
the commodity wages not with the danger: therefore,
if in our youths we could pick up some pretty
estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched.
Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods
will be strong with us for giving over.
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse.
Neither is our profession any trade; it's no
[To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you say
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:
if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent
good clothes: there's no further necessity of
qualities can make her be refused.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your
money presently. Wife, take her in; instruct her
what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her
hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her
virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall
have her first.' Such a maidenhead were no cheap
thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all
fashions: you shall fare well; you shall have the
difference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have
something to do with you. Come, you're a young
foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men
must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the
inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
'Faith, they listened to me as they would have
hearkened to their father's testament. There was a
Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at the
proclamation; but he made a groan at it, and swore
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease
hither: here he does but repair it. I know he will
come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we
should lodge them with this sign.
[To MARINA]  Pray you, come hither awhile. You
have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you must
seem to do that fearfully which you commit
willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.
To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your
lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good
opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these
blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for your
bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a
sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom.
When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good
turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou
hast the harvest out of thine own report.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake
the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up
the lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night.
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she
But to have divinity preached there! did you ever
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:
shall's go hear the vestals sing?
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous; but I
am out of the road of rutting for ever.
Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god
Priapus, and undo a whole generation. We must
either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When she
should do for clients her fitment, and do me the
kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,
her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her
knees; that she would make a puritan of the devil,
if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish us
of all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by the
way to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
We should have both lord and lown, if the peevish
baggage would but give way to customers.
You may so; 'tis the better for you that your
resorters stand upon sound legs. How now!
wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
We have here one, sir, if she would--but there never
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall
see a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had but--
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than it
gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; never
plucked yet, I can assure you.
Is she not a fair creature?
[To MARINA]  First, I would have you note, this is
Next, he's the governor of this country, and a man
If he govern the country, you are bound to him
indeed; but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will
you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take some
pains to work her to your manage. Come, we will
leave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester at
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,
and will come into 't? I hear say you are of
honourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots
of shame and iniquity. O, you have heard something
of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious
wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my
authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly
upon thee. Come, bring me to some private place:
How's this? We must take another course with you.
If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a
breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope,
shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common
hangman shall execute it. Come your ways. We'll
have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holy
She makes our profession as it were to stink afore
The nobleman would have dealt with her like a
nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:
crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never
come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born
to undo us. Will you not go the way of women-kind?
Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would
you? where a man may serve seven years for the loss
of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I can
'Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.
But since my master and mistress have bought you,
there's no going but by their consent: therefore I
will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I
doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough.
Come, I'll do for thee what I can; come your ways.
pavilion on deck, with a curtain before it; PERICLES
within it, reclined on a couch. A barge lying
near the altar, as high priestess; a number of
Virgins on each side; CERIMON and other Inhabitants
