In Troy, there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous, their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships,
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel war: sixty and nine, that wore
Their crownets regal, from the Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia; and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
With wanton Paris sleeps; and that's the quarrel.
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage: now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions: Priam's six-gated city,
Dardan, and Tymbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
Sperr up the sons of Troy.
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard: and hither am I come
A prologue arm'd, but not in confidence
Of author's pen or actor's voice, but suited
In like conditions as our argument,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
Leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle, starting thence away
To what may be digested in a play.
Like or find fault; do as your pleasures are:
Now good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.
Call here my varlet; I'll unarm again:
Why should I war without the walls of Troy,
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field; Troilus, alas! hath none.
Will this gear ne'er be mended?
The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill and to their fierceness valiant;
But I am weaker than a woman's tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,
Less valiant than the virgin in the night
Well, I have told you enough of this: for my part,
I'll not meddle nor make no further. He that will
Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry
Ay, the bolting, but you must tarry the leavening.
Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the word
Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do.
At Priam's royal table do I sit;
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts,--
So, traitor! 'When she comes!' When is she thence?
Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw
I was about to tell thee:--when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
I have, as when the sun doth light a storm,
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couch'd in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helen's--
O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus,--
When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drown'd,
Reply not in how many fathoms deep
They lie indrench'd. I tell thee I am mad
In Cressid's love: thou answer'st 'she is fair;'
Pour'st in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse, O, that her hand,
In whose comparison all whites are ink,
Writing their own reproach, to whose soft seizure
The cygnet's down is harsh and spirit of sense
Hard as the palm of ploughman: this thou tell'st me,
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her;
But, saying thus, instead of oil and balm,
Thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me
I speak no more than truth.
Thou dost not speak so much.
Faith, I'll not meddle in't. Let her be as she is:
I have had my labour for my travail; ill-thought on of
What, art thou angry, Pandarus? what, with me?
Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair
I? I care not an she were a black-a-moor; 'tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whether you do or no. She's a fool to
I'll tell her the next time I see her: for my part,
I'll meddle nor make no more i' the matter.
Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all as I
Peace, you ungracious clamours! peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides! Helen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon this argument;
It is too starved a subject for my sword.
But Pandarus,--O gods, how do you plague me!
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar;
And he's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo.
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love,
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we?
Her bed is India; there she lies, a pearl:
Between our Ilium and where she resides,
Let it be call'd the wild and wandering flood,
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our bark.
How now, Prince Troilus! wherefore not afield?
Because not there: this woman's answer sorts,
For womanish it is to be from thence.
What news, AEneas, from the field to-day?
That Paris is returned home and hurt.
Let Paris bleed; 'tis but a scar to scorn;
Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn.
Hark, what good sport is out of town to-day!
Better at home, if 'would I might' were 'may.'
But to the sport abroad: are you bound thither?
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
To see the battle. Hector, whose patience
Is, as a virtue, fix'd, to-day was moved:
He chid Andromache and struck his armourer,
And, like as there were husbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he was harness'd light,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did, as a prophet, weep what it foresaw
What was his cause of anger?
The noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks
A lord of Trojan blood, nephew to Hector;
They say he is a very man per se,
So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man, lady, hath robbed many beasts of their
But how should this man, that makes
They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and
As may be in the world, lady.
Good morrow, cousin Cressid: what do you talk of?
Good morrow, Alexander. How do you, cousin? When
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector
Hector was gone, but Helen was not up.
Even so: Hector was stirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
True, he was so: I know the cause too: he'll lay
Troilus will not come far behind him: let them take
Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a
Ay, if I ever saw him before and knew him.
Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
Then you say as I say; for, I am sure, he is not Hector.
No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
Himself! Alas, poor Troilus! I would he were.
Condition, I had gone barefoot to India.
Himself! no, he's not himself: would a' were
Th' other's not come to't; you shall tell me another
He shall not need it, if he have his own.
You have no judgment, niece: Helen
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praised his complexion above Paris.
Then Troilus should have too much: if she praised
I swear to you. I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
Then she's a merry Greek indeed.
Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th' other
Indeed, a tapster's arithmetic may soon bring his
Why, he is very young: and yet will he, within
Is he so young a man and so old a lifter?
But to prove to you that Helen loves him: she came
Juno have mercy! how came it cloven?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled: I think his smiling
O yes, an 'twere a cloud in autumn.
Why, go to, then: but to prove to you that Helen
Troilus will stand to the proof, if you'll
Troilus! why, he esteems her no more than I esteem
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle
I cannot choose but laugh, to think how she tickled
And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
Alas, poor chin! many a wart is richer.
But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laughed
But there was more temperate fire under the pot of
At what was all this laughing?
Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus' chin.
An't had been a green hair, I should have laughed
They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer.
Quoth she, 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your
That's true; make no question of that. 'Two and
So let it now; for it has been while going by.
Well, cousin. I told you a thing yesterday; think on't.
I'll be sworn 'tis true; he will weep you, an 'twere
And I'll spring up in his tears, an 'twere a nettle
Hark! they are coming from the field: shall we
Ilium? good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.
Here, here, here's an excellent place; here we may
That's AEneas: is not that a brave man? he's one of
That's Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can tell you;
When comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon: if
Will he give you the nod?
If he do, the rich shall have more.
That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; there's a
Is a' not? it does a man's heart good. Look you
Swords! any thing, he cares not; an the devil come
Look ye yonder, niece; is't not a gallant man too,
Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could see
Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
That's Helenus. I marvel where Troilus is. That's
Helenus. I think he went not forth to-day. That's Helenus.
Helenus? no. Yes, he'll fight indifferent well. I
Where? yonder? that's Deiphobus. 'Tis Troilus!
Mark him; note him. O brave Troilus! Look well upon
Had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a goddess,
Paris is dirt to him; and, I warrant, Helen, to
Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man than Troilus.
Achilles! a drayman, a porter, a very camel.
Ay, a minced man: and then to be baked with no date
You are such a woman! one knows not at what ward you
Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to
Nay, I'll watch you for that; and that's one of the
Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you.
At your own house; there he unarms him.
Good boy, tell him I come.
I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good niece.
I'll be with you, niece, by and by.
By the same token, you are a bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice,
But more in Troilus thousand fold I see
Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing:
Things won are done; joy's soul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knows nought that knows not this:
Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is:
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
Then though my heart's content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs begun on earth below
Fails in the promised largeness: cheques and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd,
As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infect the sound pine and divert his grain
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
That we come short of our suppose so far
That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls stand;
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim,
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gave't surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abash'd behold our works,
And call them shames? which are indeed nought else
But the protractive trials of great Jove
To find persistive constancy in men:
The fineness of which metal is not found
In fortune's love; for then the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
The hard and soft seem all affined and kin:
But, in the wind and tempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away;
And what hath mass or matter, by itself
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
With due observance of thy godlike seat,
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail
Upon her patient breast, making their way
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong-ribb'd bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements,
Like Perseus' horse: where's then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now
Co-rivall'd greatness? Either to harbour fled,
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so
Doth valour's show and valour's worth divide
In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
Than by the tiger; but when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
And flies fled under shade, why, then the thing of courage
As roused with rage with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key
Thou great commander, nerve and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only spirit.
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.
Besides the applause and approbation To which,
And thou most reverend for thy stretch'd-out life
I give to both your speeches, which were such
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
As venerable Nestor, hatch'd in silver,
Should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Speak, prince of Ithaca; and be't of less expect
That matter needless, of importless burden,
Divide thy lips, than we are confident,
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,
We shall hear music, wit and oracle.
Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down,
And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a master,
The specialty of rule hath been neglected:
And, look, how many Grecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
When that the general is not like the hive
To whom the foragers shall all repair,
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, the planets and this centre
Office and custom, in all line of order;
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other; whose medicinable eye
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil,
And posts, like the commandment of a king,
Sans cheque to good and bad: but when the planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues and what portents! what mutiny!
What raging of the sea! shaking of earth!
Commotion in the winds! frights, changes, horrors,
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity and married calm of states
Quite from their fixure! O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder to all high designs,
Then enterprise is sick! How could communities,
Degrees in schools and brotherhoods in cities,
The primogenitive and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree, stand in authentic place?
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And, hark, what discord follows! each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead:
Force should be right; or rather, right and wrong,
Between whose endless jar justice resides,
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
Then every thing includes itself in power,
Power into will, will into appetite;
So doubly seconded with will and power,
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last eat up himself. Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree is suffocate,
And this neglection of degree it is
That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose
It hath to climb. The general's disdain'd
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath; so every step,
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
The sinew and the forehand of our host,
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs: with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on,
And, like a strutting player, whose conceit
Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue and sound
He acts thy greatness in: and when he speaks,
Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropp'd
Would seem hyperboles. At this fusty stuff
The large Achilles, on his press'd bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause;
Now play me Nestor; hem, and stroke thy beard,
As he being drest to some oration.'
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles still cries 'Excellent!
Arming to answer in a night alarm.'
And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age
Must be the scene of mirth; to cough and spit,
And, with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the rivet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries 'O, enough, Patroclus;
Or give me ribs of steel! I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen.' And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is or is not, serves
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain--
Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns
With an imperial voice--many are infect.
Ajax is grown self-will'd, and bears his head
In such a rein, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him;
Makes factious feasts; rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites,
A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy, and call it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand: the still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike,
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil the enemies' weight,--
Why, this hath not a finger's dignity:
They call this bed-work, mappery, closet-war;
So that the ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
Or those that with the fineness of their souls
Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse
What would you 'fore our tent?
Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you?
May one, that is a herald and a prince,
Do a fair message to his kingly ears?
With surety stronger than Achilles' arm
Fair leave and large security. How may
A stranger to those most imperial looks
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
I ask, that I might waken reverence,
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes
Which is that god in office, guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us; or the men of Troy
Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarm'd,
As bending angels; that's their fame in peace:
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords; and,
Nothing so full of heart. But peace, AEneas,
Peace, Trojan; lay thy finger on thy lips!
The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth:
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows; that praise, sole sure,
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself AEneas?
Ay, Greek, that is my name.
What's your affair I pray you?
Sir, pardon; 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.
He hears naught privately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him:
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour:
That thou shalt know. Trojan, he is awake,
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
A prince call'd Hector,--Priam is his father,--
Who in this dull and long-continued truce
Is rusty grown: he bade me take a trumpet,
And to this purpose speak. Kings, princes, lords!
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece
That holds his honour higher than his ease,
That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,
That knows his valour, and knows not his fear,
That loves his mistress more than in confession,
With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
And dare avow her beauty and her worth
In other arms than hers,--to him this challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it,
He hath a lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Than ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And will to-morrow with his trumpet call
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love:
If any come, Hector shall honour him;
If none, he'll say in Troy when he retires,
The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth
The splinter of a lance. Even so much.
This shall be told our lovers, Lord AEneas;
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home: but we are soldiers;
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not, or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
That one meets Hector; if none else, I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hector's grandsire suck'd: he is old now;
But if there be not in our Grecian host
One noble man that hath one spark of fire,
To answer for his love, tell him from me
I'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver
And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn,
And meeting him will tell him that my lady
Was fairer than his grandam and as chaste
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
I'll prove this truth with my three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth!
Fair Lord AEneas, let me touch your hand;
To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.
Achilles shall have word of this intent;
So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent:
Yourself shall feast with us before you go
And find the welcome of a noble foe.
I have a young conception in my brain;
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
Blunt wedges rive hard knots: the seeded pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles must or now be cropp'd,
Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil,
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
However it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
Whose grossness little characters sum up:
And, in the publication, make no strain,
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Libya,--though, Apollo knows,
Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose
And wake him to the answer, think you?
Yes, 'tis most meet: whom may you else oppose,
That can from Hector bring his honour off,
If not Achilles? Though't be a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells;
For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute
With their finest palate: and trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
In this wild action; for the success,
Although particular, shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general;
And in such indexes, although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the giant mass
Of things to come at large. It is supposed
He that meets Hector issues from our choice
And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes merit her election, and doth boil,
As 'twere from us all, a man distill'd
Out of our virtues; who miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence the conquering part,
To steel a strong opinion to themselves?
Which entertain'd, limbs are his instruments,
In no less working than are swords and bows
Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector.
Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares,
And think, perchance, they'll sell; if not,
The lustre of the better yet to show,
Shall show the better. Do not consent
That ever Hector and Achilles meet;
For both our honour and our shame in this
Are dogg'd with two strange followers.
I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent;
A nd we were better parch in Afric sun
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes,
Should he 'scape Hector fair: if he were foil'd,
Why then, we did our main opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottery;
And, by device, let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector: among ourselves
Give him allowance for the better man;
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
We'll dress him up in voices: if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still
That we have better men. But, hit or miss,
Our project's life this shape of sense assumes:
Ajax employ'd plucks down Achilles' plumes.
Now I begin to relish thy advice;
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
To Agamemnon: go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone
Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.
Agamemnon, how if he had boils? full, all over,
And those boils did run? say so: did not the
Then would come some matter from him; I see none now.
Thou bitch-wolf's son, canst thou not hear?
The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel
Speak then, thou vinewedst leaven, speak: I will
I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but,
I think, thy horse will sooner con an oration than
Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest me thus?
Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.
Do not, porpentine, do not: my fingers itch.
I would thou didst itch from head to foot and I had
Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles,
Cerberus is at Proserpine's beauty, ay, that thou
He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a
Ay, do, do; thou sodden-witted lord! thou hast no
If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel, and
Mars his idiot! do, rudeness; do, camel; do, do.
Why, how now, Ajax! wherefore do you thus? How now,
You see him there, do you?
So I do: what's the matter?
But yet you look not well upon him; for whosoever you
Ay, but that fool knows not himself.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters! his
Achilles, Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly and
As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will
O thou damned cur! I shall--
Will you set your wit to a fool's?
No, I warrant you; for a fools will shame it.
I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenor of the
Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not
E'en so; a great deal of your wit, too, lies in your
There's Ulysses and old Nestor, whose wit was mouldy
Yes, good sooth: to, Achilles! to, Ajax! to!
I shall cut out your tongue.
I will hold my peace when Achilles' brach bids me, shall I?
I will see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I come
Marry, this, sir, is proclaim'd through all our host:
That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
Will with a trumpet 'twixt our tents and Troy
To-morrow morning call some knight to arms
That hath a stomach; and such a one that dare
Maintain--I know not what: 'tis trash. Farewell.
I know not: 'tis put to lottery; otherwise
O, meaning you. I will go learn more of it.
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this cormorant war--
Shall be struck off.' Hector, what say you to't?
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I
As far as toucheth my particular,
There is no lady of more softer bowels,
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
More ready to cry out 'Who knows what follows?'
Than Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modest doubt is call'd
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go:
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul, 'mongst many thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear as Helen; I mean, of ours:
If we have lost so many tenths of ours,
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us,
Had it our name, the value of one ten,
What merit's in that reason which denies
Weigh you the worth and honour of a king
So great as our dread father in a scale
Of common ounces? will you with counters sum
The past proportion of his infinite?
And buckle in a waist most fathomless
With spans and inches so diminutive
As fears and reasons? fie, for godly shame!
No marvel, though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them. Should not our father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so?
You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest;
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are
You know an enemy intends you harm;
You know a sword employ'd is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm:
Who marvels then, when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Or like a star disorb'd? Nay, if we talk of reason,
Let's shut our gates and sleep: manhood and honour
Should have hare-hearts, would they but fat
With this cramm'd reason: reason and respect
Make livers pale and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost
What is aught, but as 'tis valued?
But value dwells not in particular will;
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well wherein 'tis precious of itself
As in the prizer: 'tis mad idolatry
To make the service greater than the god
And the will dotes that is attributive
Without some image of the affected merit.
I take to-day a wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my will;
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores
Of will and judgment: how may I avoid,
Although my will distaste what it elected,
The wife I chose? there can be no evasion
To blench from this and to stand firm by honour:
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant,
When we have soil'd them, nor the remainder viands
We do not throw in unrespective sieve,
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks:
Your breath of full consent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce
And did him service: he touch'd the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our aunt:
Is she worth keeping? why, she is a pearl,
Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships,
And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants.
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went--
As you must needs, for you all cried 'Go, go,'--
If you'll confess he brought home noble prize--
As you must needs, for you all clapp'd your hands
And cried 'Inestimable!'--why do you now
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that fortune never did,
Beggar the estimation which you prized
Richer than sea and land? O, theft most base,
That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep!
But, thieves, unworthy of a thing so stol'n,
That in their country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our native place!
What noise? what shriek is this?
Cry, Trojans, cry! lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld,
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
Add to my clamours! let us pay betimes
A moiety of that mass of moan to come.
Cry, Trojans, cry! practise your eyes with tears!
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand;
Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.
Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helen and a woe:
Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our sister work
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood
So madly hot that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such and no other than event doth form it,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds,
Because Cassandra's mad: her brain-sick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
Which hath our several honours all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touch'd than all Priam's sons:
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
Else might the world convince of levity
As well my undertakings as your counsels:
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what, alas, can these my single arms?
What Propugnation is in one man's valour,
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet, I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties
And had as ample power as I have will,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
Like one besotted on your sweet delights:
You have the honey still, but these the gall;
So to be valiant is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it;
But I would have the soil of her fair rape
Wiped off, in honourable keeping her.
What treason were it to the ransack'd queen,
Disgrace to your great worths and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion! Can it be
That so degenerate a strain as this
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw
When Helen is defended, nor none so noble
Whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfamed
Where Helen is the subject; then, I say,
Well may we fight for her whom, we know well,
The world's large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand
Have glozed, but superficially: not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
The reasons you allege do more conduce
To the hot passion of distemper'd blood
Than to make up a free determination
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be render'd to their owners: now,
What nearer debt in all humanity
Than wife is to the husband? If this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds, of partial indulgence
To their benumbed wills, resist the same,
There is a law in each well-order'd nation
To curb those raging appetites that are
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's king,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
Of nature and of nations speak aloud
To have her back return'd: thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion
Is this in way of truth; yet ne'ertheless,
My spritely brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependance
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why, there you touch'd the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we more affected
Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood
Spent more in her defence. But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honour and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us;
For, I presume, brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory
As smiles upon the forehead of this action
You valiant offspring of great Priamus.
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dun and factious nobles of the Greeks
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits:
I was advertised their great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This, I presume, will wake him.
How now, Thersites! what lost in the labyrinth of
Mercury, lose all the serpentine craft of thy
Who's there? Thersites! Good Thersites, come in and rail.
If I could have remembered a gilt counterfeit, thou
What, art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?
Where, where? Art thou come? why, my cheese, my
Thy commander, Achilles. Then tell me, Patroclus,
Thy lord, Thersites: then tell me, I pray thee,
Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me, Patroclus,
I'll decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands
Achilles; Achilles is my lord; I am Patroclus'
Peace, fool! I have not done.
He is a privileged man. Proceed, Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool; Achilles is a fool; Thersites
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles;
Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon;
Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool, and
Make that demand of the prover. It suffices me thou
Here is such patchery, such juggling and such
Within his tent; but ill disposed, my lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here.
He shent our messengers; and we lay by
Let him be told so; lest perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
We saw him at the opening of his tent:
Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart: you may call it
What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?
Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him.
Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.
No, you see, he is his argument that has his
All the better; their fraction is more our wish than
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily
The elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy:
Achilles bids me say, he is much sorry,
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness and this noble state
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other
But for your health and your digestion sake,
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
But his evasion, wing'd thus swift with scorn,
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him; yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea, like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him; and you shall not sin,
If you do say we think him over-proud
Than in the note of judgment; and worthier
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command,
And underwrite in an observing kind
His pettish lunes, his ebbs, his flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he overhold his price so much,
We'll none of him; but let him, like an engine
Not portable, lie under this report:
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give
Before a sleeping giant.' Tell him so.
I shall; and bring his answer presently.
In second voice we'll not be satisfied;
We come to speak with him. Ulysses, enter you.
What is he more than another?
No more than what he thinks he is.
Is he so much? Do you not think he thinks himself a
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
No, noble Ajax; you are as strong, as valiant, as
Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I
Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your virtues the
I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engendering of toads.
Yet he loves himself: is't not strange?
Achilles will not to the field to-morrow.
But carries on the stream of his dispose
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar and in self-admission.
Why will he not upon our fair request
Untent his person and share the air with us?
Things small as nothing, for request's sake only,
He makes important: possess'd he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride
That quarrels at self-breath: imagined worth
Holds in his blood such swoln and hot discourse
That 'twixt his mental and his active parts
And batters down himself: what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it
Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent:
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not be so!
We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam
And never suffers matter of the world
And ruminate himself, shall he be worshipp'd
Of that we hold an idol more than he?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant lord
Must not so stale his palm, nobly acquired;
Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is,
That were to enlard his fat already pride
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
This lord go to him! Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder 'Achilles go to him.'
If I go to him, with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the face.
O, no, you shall not go.
An a' be proud with me, I'll pheeze his pride:
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
He will be the physician that should be the patient.
An all men were o' my mind,--
Wit would be out of fashion.
A' should not bear it so, a' should eat swords first:
I will knead him; I'll make him supple.
He's not yet through warm: force him with praises:
Our noble general, do not do so.
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming of him does him harm.
Here is a man--but 'tis before his face;
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shall pelter thus with us!
What a vice were it in Ajax now,--
Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature
But he that disciplined thy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain,
And give him half: and, for thy vigour,
To sinewy Ajax. I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which, like a bourn, a pale, a shore, confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts: here's Nestor;
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise:
Put pardon, father Nestor, were your days
As green as Ajax' and your brain so temper'd,
You should not have the eminence of him,
Be ruled by him, Lord Ajax.
There is no tarrying here; the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general
To call together all his state of war;
Fresh kings are come to Troy: to-morrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast:
And here's a lord,--come knights from east to west,
And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep:
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.
Friend, you! pray you, a word: do not you follow
Ay, sir, when he goes before me.
You depend upon him, I mean?
Sir, I do depend upon the lord.
You depend upon a noble gentleman; I must needs
You know me, do you not?
Friend, know me better; I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better.
You are in the state of grace.
Grace! not so, friend: honour and lordship are my titles.
I do but partly know, sir: it is music in parts.
At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too
That's to 't indeed, sir: marry, sir, at the request
No, sir, Helen: could you not find out that by her
It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not seen the
Lady Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the
Prince Troilus: I will make a complimental assault
Sodden business! there's a stewed phrase indeed!
Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair
Dear lord, you are full of fair words.
You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. Fair
You have broke it, cousin: and, by my life, you
Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude.
Well said, my lord! well, you say so in fits.
I have business to my lord, dear queen. My lord,
Nay, this shall not hedge us out: we'll hear you
Well, sweet queen. you are pleasant with me. But,
Go to, sweet queen, to go:--commends himself most
You shall not bob us out of our melody: if you do,
Sweet queen, sweet queen! that's a sweet queen, i' faith.
And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn; that shall not,
What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen?
What exploit's in hand? where sups he to-night?
What says my sweet queen? My cousin will fall out
I'll lay my life, with my disposer Cressida.
No, no, no such matter; you are wide: come, your
Ay, good my lord. Why should you say Cressida? no,
You spy! what do you spy? Come, give me an
My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have,
She shall have it, my lord, if it be not my lord Paris.
He! no, she'll none of him; they two are twain.
Falling in, after falling out, may make them three.
Come, come, I'll hear no more of this; I'll sing
Ay, ay, prithee now. By my troth, sweet lord, thou
Let thy song be love: this love will undo us all.
Love! ay, that it shall, i' faith.
Ay, good now, love, love, nothing but love.
In good troth, it begins so.
Love, love, nothing but love, still more!
These lovers cry Oh! oh! they die!
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh! oh! to ha! ha! he!
Oh! oh! a while, but ha! ha! ha!
Oh! oh! groans out for ha! ha! ha!
In love, i' faith, to the very tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves, love, and that breeds hot
Is this the generation of love? hot blood, hot
Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the
He hangs the lip at something: you know all, Lord Pandarus.
Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they
They're come from field: let us to Priam's hall,
To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd,
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
Or force of Greekish sinews; you shall do more
Than all the island kings,--disarm great Hector.
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have,
Sweet, above thought I love thee.
How now! where's thy master? at my cousin
No, sir; he stays for you to conduct him thither.
No, Pandarus: I stalk about her door,
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds
Proposed for the deserver! O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings
And fly with me to Cressid!
Walk here i' the orchard, I'll bring her straight.
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round.
The imaginary relish is so sweet
That it enchants my sense: what will it be,
When that the watery palate tastes indeed
Love's thrice repured nectar? death, I fear me,
Swooning destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle-potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness,
For the capacity of my ruder powers:
I fear it much; and I do fear besides,
That I shall lose distinction in my joys;
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
She's making her ready, she'll come straight: you
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse;
And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
Come, come, what need you blush? shame's a baby.
Here she is now: swear the oaths now to her that
Come your ways, come your ways; an you draw backward,
So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress. How now!
I part you. The falcon as the tercel, for all the
You have bereft me of all words, lady.
Words pay no debts, give her deeds: but she'll
Come in, come in: I'll go get a fire.
Will you walk in, my lord?
O Cressida, how often have I wished me thus!
Wished, my lord! The gods grant,--O my lord!
What should they grant? what makes this pretty
More dregs than water, if my fears have eyes.
Fears make devils of cherubims; they never see truly.
Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer
O, let my lady apprehend no fear: in all Cupid's
Nothing, but our undertakings; when we vow to weep
This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that the will
They say all lovers swear more performance than they
Are there such? such are not we: praise us as we
Will you walk in, my lord?
What, blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
Well, uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that: if my lord get a boy of you,
You know now your hostages; your uncle's word and my
Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred,
Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart.
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day
Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won: but I was won, my lord,
With the first glance that ever--pardon me--
If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.
I love you now; but not, till now, so much
But I might master it: in faith, I lie;
My thoughts were like unbridled children, grown
Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools!
Why have I blabb'd? who shall be true to us,
When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
But, though I loved you well, I woo'd you not;
And yet, good faith, I wish'd myself a man,
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent. See, see, your silence,
Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of counsel! stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
My lord, I do beseech you, pardon me;
I am ashamed. O heavens! what have I done?
For this time will I take my leave, my lord.
Leave! an you take leave till to-morrow morning,--
I have a kind of self resides with you;
But an unkind self, that itself will leave,
To be another's fool. I would be gone:
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak.
Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.
Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love;
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
To angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
Or else you love not, for to be wise and love
Exceeds man's might; that dwells with gods above.
O that I thought it could be in a woman--
As, if it can, I will presume in you--
To feed for aye her ramp and flames of love;
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Outliving beauty's outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter than blood decays!
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnow'd purity in love;
How were I then uplifted! but, alas!
I am as true as truth's simplicity
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that I'll war with you.
When right with right wars who shall be most right!
True swains in love shall in the world to come
Approve their truths by Troilus: when their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Want similes, truth tired with iteration,
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon,
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,
As iron to adamant, as earth to the centre,
Yet, after all comparisons of truth,
As truth's authentic author to be cited,
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot itself,
When waterdrops have worn the stones of Troy,
And blind oblivion swallow'd cities up,
And mighty states characterless are grated
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From false to false, among false maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood! when they've said 'as false
As air, as water, wind, or sandy earth,
As fox to lamb, as wolf to heifer's calf,
Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son,'
Go to, a bargain made: seal it, seal it; I'll be the
If ever you prove false one to another, since I have
Amen. Whereupon I will show you a chamber with a
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear!
Now, princes, for the service I have done you,
The advantage of the time prompts me aloud
To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind
That, through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandon'd Troy, left my possession,
Incurr'd a traitor's name; exposed myself,
To doubtful fortunes; sequestering from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition
Made tame and most familiar to my nature,
And here, to do you service, am become
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted:
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit,
Out of those many register'd in promise,
Which, you say, live to come in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us, Trojan? make demand.
You have a Trojan prisoner, call'd Antenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear.
Oft have you--often have you thanks therefore--
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange,
Whom Troy hath still denied: but this Antenor,
I know, is such a wrest in their affairs
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage; and they will almost
Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam,
In change of him: let him be sent, great princes,
And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
And bring us Cressid hither: Calchas shall have
What he requests of us. Good Diomed,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange:
Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow
Be answer'd in his challenge: Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake; and 'tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Achilles stands i' the entrance of his tent:
Please it our general to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot; and, princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him:
I will come last. 'Tis like he'll question me
Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him:
If so, I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink:
It may be good: pride hath no other glass
To show itself but pride, for supple knees
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees.
We'll execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along:
So do each lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
Than if not look'd on. I will lead the way.
What, comes the general to speak with me?
You know my mind, I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy.
What says Achilles? would he aught with us?
Would you, my lord, aught with the general?
How do you? how do you?
What, does the cuckold scorn me?
Ay, and good next day too.
What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles;
To come as humbly as they used to creep
What, am I poor of late?
Must fall out with men too: what the declined is
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall; for men, like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,
And not a man, for being simply man,
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
That are without him, as place, riches, favour,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit:
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers,
The love that lean'd on them as slippery too,
Do one pluck down another and together
Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me:
Fortune and I are friends: I do enjoy
At ample point all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks; who do, methinks, find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses;
Writes me: 'That man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath,
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection;
As when his virtues shining upon others
Heat them and they retort that heat again
The beauty that is borne here in the face
The bearer knows not, but commends itself
To others' eyes; nor doth the eye itself,
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,
Not going from itself; but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each other's form;
For speculation turns not to itself,
Till it hath travell'd and is mirror'd there
Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all.
I do not strain at the position,--
It is familiar,--but at the author's drift;
Who, in his circumstance, expressly proves
That no man is the lord of any thing,
Though in and of him there be much consisting,
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught
Till he behold them form'd in the applause
Where they're extended; who, like an arch,
The voice again, or, like a gate of steel
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
His figure and his heat.  I was much wrapt in this;
Heavens, what a man is there! a very horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are
Most abject in regard and dear in use!
What things again most dear in the esteem
And poor in worth! Now shall we see to-morrow--
An act that very chance doth throw upon him--
Ajax renown'd. O heavens, what some men do,
While some men leave to do!
How some men creep in skittish fortune's hall,
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes!
How one man eats into another's pride,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
To see these Grecian lords!--why, even already
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast
I do believe it; for they pass'd by me
As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me
Good word nor look: what, are my deeds forgot?
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
Those scraps are good deeds past; which are devour'd
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
As done: perseverance, dear my lord,
Keeps honour bright: to have done is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail
In monumental mockery. Take the instant way;
For honour travels in a strait so narrow,
Where one but goes abreast: keep then the path;
For emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue: if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
Like to an enter'd tide, they all rush by
Or like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
O'er-run and trampled on: then what they do in present,
Though less than yours in past, must o'ertop yours;
For time is like a fashionable host
That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand,
And with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer: welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. O, let not
Remuneration for the thing it was;
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And give to dust that is a little gilt
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
Than what not stirs. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
And case thy reputation in thy tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods themselves
And drave great Mars to faction.
The reasons are more potent and heroical:
The providence that's in a watchful state
Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold,
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps,
Keeps place with thought and almost, like the gods,
Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.
There is a mystery--with whom relation
Durst never meddle--in the soul of state;
Which hath an operation more divine
Than breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerce that you have had with Troy
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord;
And better would it fit Achilles much
To throw down Hector than Polyxena:
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home,
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him.'
Farewell, my lord: I as your lover speak;
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.
To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you:
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action. I stand condemn'd for this;
They think my little stomach to the war
And your great love to me restrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold,
And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane,
Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
I see my reputation is at stake
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves:
Omission to do what is necessary
Seals a commission to a blank of danger;
And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
Even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus:
I'll send the fool to Ajax and desire him
To invite the Trojan lords after the combat
To see us here unarm'd: I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view.
Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for himself.
He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so
Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock,--a stride
The man's undone forever; for if Hector break not his
Ajax;' and he replies 'Thanks, Agamemnon.' What think
A plague of opinion! a man may wear it on both
Thou must be my ambassador to him, Thersites.
Who, I? why, he'll answer nobody; he professes not
Patroclus make demands to me, you shall see the
To him, Patroclus; tell him I humbly desire the
I come from the worthy Achilles,--
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,--
And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon.
God b' wi' you, with all my heart.
If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven o'clock it will
Fare you well, with all my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No, but he's out o' tune thus. What music will be in
Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him straight.
Let me bear another to his horse; for that's the more
My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirr'd;
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Would the fountain of your mind were clear again,
See, ho! who is that there?
Is the prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As you, prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
That's my mind too. Good morrow, Lord AEneas.
A valiant Greek, AEneas,--take his hand,--
Witness the process of your speech, wherein
You told how Diomed, a whole week by days,
Did haunt you in the field.
During all question of the gentle truce;
But when I meet you arm'd, as black defiance
As heart can think or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces.
Our bloods are now in calm; and, so long, health!
But when contention and occasion meet,
By Jove, I'll play the hunter for thy life
With all my force, pursuit and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly
With his face backward. In humane gentleness,
Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life,
Welcome, indeed! By Venus' hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort
The thing he means to kill more excellently.
We sympathize: Jove, let AEneas live,
If to my sword his fate be not the glory,
A thousand complete courses of the sun!
But, in mine emulous honour, let him die,
With every joint a wound, and that to-morrow!
We do; and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.
I was sent for to the king; but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you: 'twas to bring this Greek
To Calchas' house, and there to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid:
Let's have your company, or, if you please,
Haste there before us: I constantly do think--
Or rather, call my thought a certain knowledge--
My brother Troilus lodges there to-night:
Rouse him and give him note of our approach.
With the whole quality wherefore: I fear
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece
The bitter disposition of the time
Will have it so. On, lord; we'll follow you.
And tell me, noble Diomed, faith, tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship,
Who, in your thoughts, merits fair Helen best,
He merits well to have her, that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soilure,
With such a hell of pain and world of charge,
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not palating the taste of her dishonour,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece;
You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more;
But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
She's bitter to her country: hear me, Paris:
For every false drop in her bawdy veins
A Grecian's life hath sunk; for every scruple
A Trojan hath been slain: since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath
As for her Greeks and Trojans suffer'd death.
Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
We'll but commend what we intend to sell.
Dear, trouble not yourself: the morn is cold.
Then, sweet my lord, I'll call mine uncle down;
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses
As infants' empty of all thought!
O Cressida! but that the busy day,
Waked by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
With wings more momentary-swift than thought.
You will catch cold, and curse me.
O foolish Cressid! I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark!
A pestilence on him! now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life!
How now, how now! how go maidenheads? Here, you
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle!
You bring me to do, and then you flout me too.
To do what? to do what? let her say
Come, come, beshrew your heart! you'll ne'er be good,
Ha! ha! Alas, poor wretch! ah, poor capocchia!
Did not I tell you? Would he were knock'd i' the head!
Who's that at door? good uncle, go and see.
My lord, come you again into my chamber:
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Come, you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
How earnestly they knock! Pray you, come in:
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat
Who's there? my Lord AEneas! By my troth,
I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Here! what should he do here?
Come, he is here, my lord; do not deny him:
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here, say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll
Who!--nay, then: come, come, you'll do him wrong
My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand
The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor
Deliver'd to us; and for him forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes' hand
By Priam and the general state of Troy:
They are at hand and ready to effect it.
I will go meet them: and, my Lord AEneas,
We met by chance; you did not find me here.
Good, good, my lord; the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Is't possible? no sooner got but lost? The devil
How now! what's the matter? who was here?
Why sigh you so profoundly? where's my lord? gone!
Tell me, sweet uncle, what's the matter?
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above!
O the gods! what's the matter?
Prithee, get thee in: would thou hadst ne'er been
Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees! beseech you,
Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone; thou
O you immortal gods! I will not go.
I will not, uncle: I have forgot my father;
I know no touch of consanguinity;
No kin no love, no blood, no soul so near me
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine!
Make Cressid's name the very crown of falsehood,
If ever she leave Troilus! Time, force, and death,
Do to this body what extremes you can;
But the strong base and building of my love
Is as the very centre of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I'll go in and weep,--
Tear my bright hair and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs and break my heart
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefix'd
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
Tell you the lady what she is to do,
And haste her to the purpose.
I'll bring her to the Grecian presently:
And to his hand when I deliver her,
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
A priest there offering to it his own heart.
I know what 'tis to love;
And would, as I shall pity, I could help!
Please you walk in, my lords.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect, that I taste,
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it: how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affection,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like allayment could I give my grief.
My love admits no qualifying dross;
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.
What a pair of spectacles is here!
Let me embrace too. 'O heart,' as the goodly saying is,
There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away
Cressid, I love thee in so strain'd a purity,
That the bless'd gods, as angry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal than the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from me.
Ay, ay, ay, ay; 'tis too plain a case.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
And suddenly; where injury of chance
Puts back leave-taking, justles roughly by
All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips
Our lock'd embrasures, strangles our dear vows
Even in the birth of our own labouring breath:
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
Injurious time now with a robber's haste
Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how:
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath and consign'd kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a lose adieu,
And scants us with a single famish'd kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
Hark! you are call'd: some say the Genius so
Cries 'come' to him that instantly must die.
Bid them have patience; she shall come anon.
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or
I must then to the Grecians?
A woful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks!
Hear me, my love: be thou but true of heart,--
I true! how now! what wicked deem is this?
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I speak not 'be thou true,' as fearing thee,
For I will throw my glove to Death himself,
That there's no maculation in thy heart:
But 'be thou true,' say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation; be thou true,
O, you shall be exposed, my lord, to dangers
As infinite as imminent! but I'll be true.
And I'll grow friend with danger. Wear this sleeve.
And you this glove. When shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels,
Hear while I speak it, love:
The Grecian youths are full of quality;
They're loving, well composed with gifts of nature,
Flowing and swelling o'er with arts and exercise:
How novelty may move, and parts with person,
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy--
Which, I beseech you, call a virtuous sin--
O heavens! you love me not.
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit: I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of these
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil
That tempts most cunningly: but be not tempted.
But something may be done that we will not:
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Come, kiss; and let us part.
And bring AEneas and the Grecian with you.
My lord, will you be true?
Who, I? alas, it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
Is 'plain and true;' there's all the reach of it.
Welcome, Sir Diomed! here is the lady
Which for Antenor we deliver you:
At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and, by my soul, fair Greek,
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword,
Name Cressida and thy life shall be as safe
So please you, save the thanks this prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage; and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee
In praising her: I tell thee, lord of Greece,
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises
As thou unworthy to be call'd her servant.
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge;
For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
O, be not moved, Prince Troilus:
Let me be privileged by my place and message,
To be a speaker free; when I am hence
I'll answer to my lust: and know you, lord,
I'll nothing do on charge: to her own worth
She shall be prized; but that you say 'be't so,'
I'll speak it in my spirit and honour, 'no.'
Come, to the port. I'll tell thee, Diomed,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.
Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
How have we spent this morning!
The prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That sore to ride before him to the field.
Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity,
Let us address to tend on Hector's heels:
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
On his fair worth and single chivalry.
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax; that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great combatant
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek
Outswell the colic of puff'd Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest and let thy eyes spout blood;
Is not yond Diomed, with Calchas' daughter?
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular;
And very courtly counsel: I'll begin.
I'll take what winter from your lips, fair lady:
I had good argument for kissing once.
But that's no argument for kissing now;
For this popp'd Paris in his hardiment,
And parted thus you and your argument.
O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns!
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns.
The first was Menelaus' kiss; this, mine:
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
I'll have my kiss, sir. Lady, by your leave.
In kissing, do you render or receive?
I'll make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better than you give;
I'll give you boot, I'll give you three for one.
You're an odd man; give even or give none.
An odd man, lady! every man is odd.
No, Paris is not; for you know 'tis true,
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me o' the head.
It were no match, your nail against his horn.
May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
Why then for Venus' sake, give me a kiss,
When Helen is a maid again, and his.
I am your debtor, claim it when 'tis due.
Never's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady, a word: I'll bring you to your father.
There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip,
Nay, her foot speaks; her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body.
O, these encounterers, so glib of tongue,
That give accosting welcome ere it comes,
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
To every ticklish reader! set them down
Hail, all you state of Greece! what shall be done
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose
A victor shall be known? will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
By any voice or order of the field?
Which way would Hector have it?
He cares not; he'll obey conditions.
A little proudly, and great deal misprizing
Therefore Achilles: but, whate'er, know this:
In the extremity of great and little,
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood:
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home;
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
This blended knight, half Trojan and half Greek.
A maiden battle, then? O, I perceive you.
Here is Sir Diomed. Go, gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax: as you and Lord AEneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it; either to the uttermost,
Or else a breath: the combatants being kin
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue;
Not soon provoked nor being provoked soon calm'd:
His heart and hand both open and both free;
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impure thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action
Is more vindicative than jealous love:
They call him Troilus, and on him erect
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says AEneas; one that knows the youth
Even to his inches, and with private soul
Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me.
His blows are well disposed: there, Ajax!
I am not warm yet; let us fight again.
Why, then will I no more:
Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son,
A cousin-german to great Priam's seed;
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain:
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so
That thou couldst say 'This hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan; the sinews of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy; my mother's blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my father's;' by Jove multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud: but the just gods gainsay
That any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother,
My sacred aunt, should by my mortal sword
Be drain'd! Let me embrace thee, Ajax:
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus:
Thou art too gentle and too free a man:
I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence
A great addition earned in thy death.
On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st Oyes
Cries 'This is he,' could promise to himself
A thought of added honour torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
The issue is embracement: Ajax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success--
As seld I have the chance--I would desire
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.
Doth long to see unarm'd the valiant Hector.
AEneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
To the expecters of our Trojan part;
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my cousin;
I will go eat with thee and see your knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.
The worthiest of them tell me name by name;
But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy of arms! as welcome as to one
That would be rid of such an enemy;
But that's no welcome: understand more clear,
What's past and what's to come is strew'd with husks
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strain'd purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
Bids thee, with most divine integrity,
From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.
I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon.
Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
O, you, my lord? by Mars his gauntlet, thanks!
Mock not, that I affect the untraded oath;
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove:
She's well, but bade me not commend her to you.
Name her not now, sir; she's a deadly theme.
I have, thou gallant Trojan, seen thee oft
Labouring for destiny make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee,
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' the air,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers by
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemm'd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling: this have I seen;
But this thy countenance, still lock'd in steel,
I never saw till now. I knew thy grandsire,
And once fought with him: he was a soldier good;
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
Never saw like thee. Let an old man embrace thee;
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.
Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle,
That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention,
As they contend with thee in courtesy.
By this white beard, I'ld fight with thee to-morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome! I have seen the time.
I wonder now how yonder city stands
When we have here her base and pillar by us.
I know your favour, Lord Ulysses, well.
Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed
In Ilion, on your Greekish embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue:
My prophecy is but half his journey yet;
For yonder walls, that pertly front your town,
Yond towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
There they stand yet, and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common arbitrator, Time,
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome:
After the general, I beseech you next
To feast with me and see me at my tent.
I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou!
Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
I have with exact view perused thee, Hector,
Stand fair, I pray thee: let me look on thee.
Thou art too brief: I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
O, like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er;
But there's more in me than thou understand'st.
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him? whether there, or there, or there?
That I may give the local wound a name
And make distinct the very breach whereout
Hector's great spirit flew: answer me, heavens!
It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
To answer such a question: stand again:
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
Wert thou an oracle to tell me so,
I'd not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee well;
For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there;
But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm,
I'll kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag;
His insolence draws folly from my lips;
But I'll endeavour deeds to match these words,
And you, Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you to't:
You may have every day enough of Hector
If you have stomach; the general state, I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
I pray you, let us see you in the field:
We have had pelting wars, since you refused
To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent;
There in the full convive we: afterwards,
As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall
Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus:
There Diomed doth feast with him to-night;
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
Shall sweet lord, be bound to you so much,
After we part from Agamemnon's tent,
As gentle tell me, of what honour was
This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
A mock is due. Will you walk on, my lord?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and doth:
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth.
I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night,
Which with my scimitar I'll cool to-morrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.
How now, thou core of envy!
Thou crusty batch of nature, what's the news?
Why, thou picture of what thou seemest, and idol
Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.
The surgeon's box, or the patient's wound.
Well said, adversity! and what need these tricks?
Prithee, be silent, boy; I profit not by thy talk:
Male varlet, you rogue! what's that?
Why, his masculine whore. Now, the rotten diseases
Why thou damnable box of envy, thou, what meanest
Why no, you ruinous butt, you whoreson
No! why art thou then exasperate, thou idle
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in to-morrow's battle.
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair love,
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it:
Fall Greeks; fail fame; honour or go or stay;
My major vow lies here, this I'll obey.
Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent:
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
With too much blood and too little brain, these two
Here's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough and one
To an ass, were nothing; he is both ass and ox: to
We go wrong, we go wrong.
There, where we see the lights.
Here comes himself to guide you.
Welcome, brave Hector; welcome, princes all.
So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night.
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks and good night to the Greeks' general.
Sweet draught: 'sweet' quoth 'a! sweet sink,
Good night and welcome, both at once, to those
Old Nestor tarries; and you too, Diomed,
Keep Hector company an hour or two.
I cannot, lord; I have important business,
The tide whereof is now. Good night, great Hector.
That same Diomed's a false-hearted rogue, a most
What, are you up here, ho? speak.
Calchas, I think. Where's your daughter?
Stand where the torch may not discover us.
Now, my sweet guardian! Hark, a word with you.
She will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may sing her, if he can take her cliff;
And let your mind be coupled with your words.
Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Foh, foh! come, tell a pin: you are forsworn.
In faith, I cannot: what would you have me do?
A juggling trick,--to be secretly open.
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath;
Bid me do any thing but that, sweet Greek.
No, no, good night: I'll be your fool no more.
Hark, one word in your ear.
You are moved, prince; let us depart, I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly; I beseech you, go.
Nay, good my lord, go off:
You flow to great distraction; come, my lord.
I pray you, stay; by hell and all hell's torments
I will not speak a word!
Nay, but you part in anger.
In faith, I do not: come hither once again.
You shake, my lord, at something: will you go?
Nay, stay; by Jove, I will not speak a word:
There is between my will and all offences
A guard of patience: stay a little while.
How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump and
In faith, I will, la; never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
I will not be myself, nor have cognition
Of what I feel: I am all patience.
Now the pledge; now, now, now!
O beauty! where is thy faith?
I will be patient; outwardly I will.
You look upon that sleeve; behold it well.
He loved me--O false wench!--Give't me again.
It is no matter, now I have't again.
I will not meet with you to-morrow night:
I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.
Now she sharpens: well said, whetstone!
O, all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge!
Thy master now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it,
As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from me;
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
You shall not have it, Diomed; faith, you shall not;
I will have this: whose was it?
Come, tell me whose it was.
But, now you have it, take it.
And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
To-morrow will I wear it on my helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, and worest it on thy horn,
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past: and yet it is not;
I will not keep my word.
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
I do not like this fooling.
Nor I, by Pluto: but that that likes not you pleases me best.
What, shall I come? the hour?
Ay, come:--O Jove!--do come:--I shall be plagued.
Troilus, farewell! one eye yet looks on thee
But with my heart the other eye doth see.
Ah, poor our sex! this fault in us I find,
The error of our eye directs our mind:
What error leads must err; O, then conclude
Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude.
A proof of strength she could not publish more,
Unless she said ' My mind is now turn'd whore.'
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke.
But if I tell how these two did co-act,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
That doth invert the attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Why, my negation hath no taste of madness.
Nor mine, my lord: Cressid was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood!
Think, we had mothers; do not give advantage
To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme,
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cressid's rule: rather think this not Cressid.
What hath she done, prince, that can soil our mothers?
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will he swagger himself out on's own eyes?
This she? no, this is Diomed's Cressida:
If beauty have a soul, this is not she;
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods' delight,
If there be rule in unity itself,
This is not she. O madness of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against itself!
Bi-fold authority! where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason
Without revolt: this is, and is not, Cressid.
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature that a thing inseparate
Divides more wider than the sky and earth,
And yet the spacious breadth of this division
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter.
Instance, O instance! strong as Pluto's gates;
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven:
Instance, O instance! strong as heaven itself;
The bonds of heaven are slipp'd, dissolved, and loosed;
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics
Of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed.
May worthy Troilus be half attach'd
With that which here his passion doth express?
Ay, Greek; and that shall be divulged well
In characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so fix'd a soul.
Hark, Greek: as much as I do Cressid love,
So much by weight hate I her Diomed:
That sleeve is mine that he'll bear on his helm;
Were it a casque composed by Vulcan's skill,
My sword should bite it: not the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringed in mass by the almighty sun,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear
In his descent than shall my prompted sword
He'll tickle it for his concupy.
O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false!
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
I have been seeking you this hour, my lord:
Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy;
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you, prince. My courteous lord, adieu.
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head!
I'll bring you to the gates.
Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I would
Patroclus will give me any thing for the
Lechery, lechery; still, wars and lechery; nothing
When was my lord so much ungently temper'd,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to-day.
You train me to offend you; get you in:
By all the everlasting gods, I'll go!
My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.
Here, sister; arm'd, and bloody in intent.
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees; for I have dream'd
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Be gone, I say: the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows:
They are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
O, be persuaded! do not count it holy
To hurt by being just: it is as lawful,
For we would give much, to use violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
Lie every man holds dear; but the brave man
Holds honour far more precious-dear than life.
How now, young man! mean'st thou to fight to-day?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
No, faith, young Troilus; doff thy harness, youth;
I am to-day i' the vein of chivalry:
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave boy,
I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a lion than a man.
What vice is that, good Troilus? chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
You bid them rise, and live.
For the love of all the gods,
Let's leave the hermit pity with our mothers,
And when we have our armours buckled on,
The venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth.
Troilus, I would not have you fight to-day.
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire;
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears;
Not you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
Opposed to  hinder me, should stop my way,
Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now if thou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Thy wife hath dream'd; thy mother hath had visions;
Cassandra doth foresee; and I myself
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valour, to appear
Ay, but thou shalt not go.
I must not break my faith.
You know me dutiful; therefore, dear sir,
Let me not shame respect; but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him!
Andromache, I am offended with you:
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
Look, how thou diest! look, how thy eye turns pale!
Look, how thy wounds do bleed at many vents!
Hark, how Troy roars! how Hecuba cries out!
How poor Andromache shrills her dolours forth!
Like witless antics, one another meet,
And all cry, Hector! Hector's dead! O Hector!
Farewell: yet, soft! Hector! take my leave:
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive.
You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the town: we'll forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee!
They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe,
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve.
Do you hear, my lord? do you hear?
Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.
A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick so
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart:
The effect doth operate another way.
Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.
My love with words and errors still she feeds;
But edifies another with her deeds.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another; I'll go
O' the t'other side, the policy of those crafty
Soft! here comes sleeve, and t'other.
Fly not; for shouldst thou take the river Styx,
I do not fly, but advantageous care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
Hold thy whore, Grecian!--now for thy whore,
Trojan!--now the sleeve, now the sleeve!
What art thou, Greek? art thou for Hector's match?
Art thou of blood and honour?
No, no, I am a rascal; a scurvy railing knave:
God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but a
Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus' horse;
Present the fair steed to my lady Cressid:
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan,
And am her knight by proof.
Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon
And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam,
Upon the pashed corses of the kings
Epistrophus and Cedius: Polyxenes is slain,
Patroclus ta'en or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised: the dreadful Sagittary
Appals our numbers: haste we, Diomed,
To reinforcement, or we perish all.
Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles;
And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks work; anon he's there afoot,
And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls
Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,
And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mower's swath:
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes,
That what he will he does, and does so much
O, courage, courage, princes! great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance:
Patroclus' wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
That noseless, handless, hack'd and chipp'd, come to him,
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend
And foams at mouth, and he is arm'd and at it,
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to-day
With such a careless force and forceless care
As if that luck, in very spite of cunning,
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face;
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry:
Hector? where's Hector? I will none but Hector.
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head!
Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
Ere that correction. Troilus, I say! what, Troilus!
O traitor Diomed! turn thy false face, thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse!
I'll fight with him alone: stand, Diomed.
He is my prize; I will not look upon.
Come, both you cogging Greeks; have at you both!
Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
Now do I see thee, ha! have at thee, Hector!
I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan:
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again;
Till when, go seek thy fortune.
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee. How now, my brother!
Ajax hath ta'en AEneas: shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him: I'll be ta'en too,
Or bring him off: fate, hear me what I say!
I reck not though I end my life to-day.
Stand, stand, thou Greek; thou art a goodly mark:
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well;
I'll frush it and unlock the rivets all,
But I'll be master of it: wilt thou not,
Why, then fly on, I'll hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me, you my Myrmidons;
Mark what I say. Attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath:
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about;
In fellest manner execute your aims.
Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye:
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it. Now,
I am a bastard too; I love bastards: I am a bastard
Take heed, the quarrel's most ominous to us: if the
Most putrefied core, so fair without,
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my day's work done; I'll take good breath:
Rest, sword; thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels:
Even with the vail and darking of the sun,
To close the day up, Hector's life is done.
I am unarm'd; forego this vantage, Greek.
Strike, fellows, strike; this is the man I seek.
So, Ilion, fall thou next! now, Troy, sink down!
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain,
Hark! a retire upon our Grecian part.
The Trojan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth,
My half-supp'd sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to my horse's tail;
Along the field I will the Trojan trail.
Hark! hark! what shout is that?
The bruit is, Hector's slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet bragless let it be;
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
March patiently along: let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our tent.
If in his death the gods have us befriended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Stand, ho! yet are we masters of the field:
Never go home; here starve we out the night.
He's dead; and at the murderer's horse's tail,
In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful field.
Frown on, you heavens, effect your rage with speed!
Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smile at Troy!
I say, at once let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on!
My lord, you do discomfort all the host!
You understand me not that tell me so:
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be call'd,
Go in to Troy, and say there, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priam turn to stone;
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,
Cold statues of the youth, and, in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself. But, march away:
Hector is dead; there is no more to say.
Stay yet. You vile abominable tents,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
I'll through and through you! and, thou great-sized coward,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates:
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy! with comfort go:
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name!
A goodly medicine for my aching bones! O world!
O traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set
Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your
As many as be here of pander's hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this,
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss:
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeathe you my diseases.
