If music be the food of love, play on;
Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so die.
That strain again! it had a dying fall:
O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound,
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odour! Enough; no more:
O spirit of love! how quick and fresh art thou,
Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
But falls into abatement and low price,
Even in a minute: so full of shapes is fancy
That it alone is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt, my lord?
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have:
O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,
Methought she purged the air of pestilence!
That instant was I turn'd into a hart;
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
How now! what news from her?
So please my lord, I might not be admitted;
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The element itself, till seven years' heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view;
But, like a cloistress, she will veiled walk
And water once a day her chamber round
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting in her sad remembrance.
O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else
That live in her; when liver, brain and heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and fill'd
Her sweet perfections with one self king!
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers:
Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium.
Perchance he is not drown'd: what think you, sailors?
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
True, madam: and, to comfort you with chance,
Assure yourself, after our ship did split,
When you and those poor number saved with you
Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
Courage and hope both teaching him the practise,
To a strong mast that lived upon the sea;
Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
So long as I could see.
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The like of him. Know'st thou this country?
Ay, madam, well; for I was bred and born
Not three hours' travel from this very place.
A noble duke, in nature as in name.
Orsino! I have heard my father name him:
And so is now, or was so very late;
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then 'twas fresh in murmur,--as, you know,
What great ones do the less will prattle of,--
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died: for whose dear love,
They say, she hath abjured the company
O that I served that lady
And might not be delivered to the world,
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
Because she will admit no kind of suit,
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain;
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
With this thy fair and outward character.
I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously,
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
For such disguise as haply shall become
The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke:
Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him:
It may be worth thy pains; for I can sing
And speak to him in many sorts of music
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap to time I will commit;
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be:
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
I thank thee: lead me on.
What a plague means my niece, to take the death of
By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o'
Why, let her except, before excepted.
Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest
Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am:
That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard
He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats:
Fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the
He hath indeed, almost natural: for besides that
By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors
They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.
With drinking healths to my niece: I'll drink to
Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
Sir Toby Belch! how now, Sir Toby Belch!
Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.
You mistake, knight; 'accost' is front her, board
By my troth, I would not undertake her in this
An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst
An you part so, mistress, I would I might never
Sir, I have not you by the hand.
Marry, but you shall have; and here's my hand.
Now, sir, 'thought is free:' I pray you, bring
Why, I think so: I am not such an ass but I can
Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends: marry,
O knight thou lackest a cup of canary: when did I
Never in your life, I think; unless you see canary
An I thought that, I'ld forswear it. I'll ride home
What is 'Pourquoi'? do or not do? I would I had
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Past question; for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
But it becomes me well enough, does't not?
Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff; and I
Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby: your niece
She'll none o' the count: she'll not match above
I'll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' the
Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Faith, I can cut a caper.
And I can cut the mutton to't.
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong
Wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have
I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy
Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a
What shall we do else? were we not born under Taurus?
No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see the
If the duke continue these favours towards you,
Cesario, you are like to be much advanced: he hath
You either fear his humour or my negligence, that
I thank you. Here comes the count.
On your attendance, my lord; here.
Stand you a while aloof, Cesario,
Thou know'st no less but all; I have unclasp'd
To thee the book even of my secret soul:
Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her;
Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
O, then unfold the passion of my love,
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith:
It shall become thee well to act my woes;
She will attend it better in thy youth
Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.
I think not so, my lord.
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
That say thou art a man: Diana's lip
Is not more smooth and rubious; thy small pipe
Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound,
And all is semblative a woman's part.
I know thy constellation is right apt
For this affair. Some four or five attend him;
All, if you will; for I myself am best
When least in company. Prosper well in this,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will
Let her hang me: he that is well hanged in this
He shall see none to fear.
A good lenten answer: I can tell thee where that
In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it; and those
Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent; or,
Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage; and,
Not so, neither; but I am resolved on two points.
That if one break, the other will hold; or, if both
Apt, in good faith; very apt. Well, go thy way; if
Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a
Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my
Wit, an't be thy will, put me into good fooling!
Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft
Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.
Go to, you're a dry fool; I'll no more of you:
Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel
Sir, I bade them take away you.
Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, cucullus non
I must catechise you for it, madonna: good my mouse
Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your proof.
Good fool, for my brother's death.
I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's
What think you of this fool, Malvolio? doth he not mend?
Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him:
God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the
How say you to that, Malvolio?
I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a
Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou
Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much
From the Count Orsino, is it?
I know not, madam: 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.
Who of my people hold him in delay?
Fetch him off, I pray you; he speaks nothing but
Go you, Malvolio: if it be a suit from the count, I
Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and
Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest
By mine honour, half drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?
Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?
Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.
Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not: give
What's a drunken man like, fool?
Like a drowned man, a fool and a mad man: one
Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my
He is but mad yet, madonna; and the fool shall look
Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with
Tell him he shall not speak with me.
Has been told so; and he says, he'll stand at your
What kind o' man is he?
Of very ill manner; he'll speak with you, will you or no.
Of what personage and years is he?
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for
Let him approach: call in my gentlewoman.
Give me my veil: come, throw it o'er my face.
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy.
The honourable lady of the house, which is she?
Speak to me; I shall answer for her.
Most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beauty,--I
I can say little more than I have studied, and that
No, my profound heart: and yet, by the very fangs
If I do not usurp myself, I am.
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp
Come to what is important in't: I forgive you the praise.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.
It is the more like to be feigned: I pray you,
Will you hoist sail, sir? here lies your way.
No, good swabber; I am to hull here a little
Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when
It alone concerns your ear. I bring no overture of
Yet you began rudely. What are you? what would you?
The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I
Give us the place alone: we will hear this divinity.
Now, sir, what is your text?
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.
In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom?
To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.
O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?
Good madam, let me see your face.
Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate
Look you, sir, such a one I was this present: is't
Excellently done, if God did all.
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on:
Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave
And leave the world no copy.
O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted; I will give
I see you what you are, you are too proud;
But, if you were the devil, you are fair.
My lord and master loves you: O, such love
Could be but recompensed, though you were crown'd
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Your lord does know my mind; I cannot love him:
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learn'd and valiant;
And in dimension and the shape of nature
A gracious person: but yet I cannot love him;
He might have took his answer long ago.
If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suffering, such a deadly life,
In your denial I would find no sense;
Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house;
Write loyal cantons of contemned love
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
Halloo your name to the reverberate hills
And make the babbling gossip of the air
Cry out 'Olivia!' O, You should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth,
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I cannot love him: let him send no more;
Unless, perchance, you come to me again,
To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well:
I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.
I am no fee'd post, lady; keep your purse:
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love;
And let your fervor, like my master's, be
Placed in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.
I am a gentleman.' I'll be sworn thou art;
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions and spirit,
Do give thee five-fold blazon: not too fast:
Unless the master were the man. How now!
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
With an invisible and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
Run after that same peevish messenger,
The county's man: he left this ring behind him,
Would I or not: tell him I'll none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes; I am not for him:
If that the youth will come this way to-morrow,
I'll give him reasons for't: hie thee, Malvolio.
I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
What is decreed must be, and be this so.
Will you stay no longer? nor will you not that I go with you?
By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over
ANTONIO: Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
No, sooth, sir: my determinate voyage is mere
Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard
A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled
Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be
If you will not undo what you have done, that is,
Fare ye well at once: my bosom is full of kindness,
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!
I have many enemies in Orsino's court,
Else would I very shortly see thee there.
But, come what may, I do adore thee so,
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia?
Even now, sir; on a moderate pace I have since
She returns this ring to you, sir: you might have
She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord
She took the ring of me: I'll none of it.
Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her; and her
I left no ring with her: what means this lady?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her!
She made good view of me; indeed, so much,
That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me, sure; the cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger.
None of my lord's ring! why, he sent her none.
I am the man: if it be so, as 'tis,
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Disguise, I see, thou art a wickedness,
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it for the proper-false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we!
For such as we are made of, such we be.
How will this fadge? my master loves her dearly;
And I, poor monster, fond as much on him;
And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love;
As I am woman,--now alas the day!--
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
O time! thou must untangle this, not I;
It is too hard a knot for me to untie!
Approach, Sir Andrew: not to be abed after
Nay, my troth, I know not: but I know, to be up
A false conclusion: I hate it as an unfilled can.
To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is
Faith, so they say; but I think it rather consists
Thou'rt a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink.
Marian, I say! a stoup of wine!
Here comes the fool, i' faith.
How now, my hearts! did you never see the picture
Welcome, ass. Now let's have a catch.
By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I
Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus: 'twas
I did impeticos thy gratillity; for Malvolio's nose
Excellent! why, this is the best fooling, when all
Come on; there is sixpence for you: let's have a song.
There's a testril of me too: if one knight give a--
Would you have a love-song, or a song of good life?
Ay, ay: I care not for good life.
O mistress mine, where are you roaming?
O, stay and hear; your true love's coming,
That can sing both high and low:
Every wise man's son doth know.
What is love? 'tis not hereafter;
What's to come is still unsure:
In delay there lies no plenty;
Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty,
Youth's a stuff will not endure.
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion.
But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we
An you love me, let's do't: I am dog at a catch.
By'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.
Most certain. Let our catch be, 'Thou knave.'
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady
My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's
I consanguineous? am I not of her blood?
Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.
Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do
I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it
For the love o' God, peace!
My masters, are you mad? or what are you? Have ye
We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My lady bade me
This is much credit to you.
Out o' tune, sir: ye lie. Art any more than a
Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the
Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir, rub your chain with
Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady's favour at any
Do't, knight: I'll write thee a challenge: or I'll
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight: since the
I know I can do it.
Possess us, possess us; tell us something of him.
Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.
O, if I thought that I'ld beat him like a dog!
What, for being a puritan? thy exquisite reason,
I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason
The devil a puritan that he is, or any thing
I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of
I have't in my nose too.
He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop,
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.
And your horse now would make him an ass.
Sport royal, I warrant you: I know my physic will
Before me, she's a good wench.
She's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me:
Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for
If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
Send for money, knight: if thou hast her not i'
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late
Give me some music. Now, good morrow, friends.
Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and antique song we heard last night:
Methought it did relieve my passion much,
More than light airs and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times:
He is not here, so please your lordship that should sing it.
Feste, the jester, my lord; a fool that the lady
Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the house.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
Come hither, boy: if ever thou shalt love,
In the sweet pangs of it remember me;
For such as I am all true lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It gives a very echo to the seat
My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves:
She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
Too old by heaven: let still the woman take
An elder than herself: so wears she to him,
So sways she level in her husband's heart:
For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,
Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
I think it well, my lord.
Then let thy love be younger than thyself,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent;
For women are as roses, whose fair flower
Being once display'd, doth fall that very hour.
And so they are: alas, that they are so;
To die, even when they to perfection grow!
O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.
Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain;
The spinsters and the knitters in the sun
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones
Do use to chant it: it is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love,
And in sad cypress let me be laid;
I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
My part of death, no one so true
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
On my black coffin let there be strown;
Not a friend, not a friend greet
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown:
A thousand thousand sighs to save,
Sad true lover never find my grave,
No pains, sir: I take pleasure in singing, sir.
Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.
Give me now leave to leave thee.
Now, the melancholy god protect thee; and the
Let all the rest give place.
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
Tell her, my love, more noble than the world,
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;
The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her,
Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune;
But 'tis that miracle and queen of gems
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
But if she cannot love you, sir?
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love a great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia: you cannot love her;
You tell her so; must she not then be answer'd?
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion
As love doth give my heart; no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much; they lack retention
Alas, their love may be call'd appetite,
No motion of the liver, but the palate,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment and revolt;
But mine is all as hungry as the sea,
And can digest as much: make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me
Too well what love women to men may owe:
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter loved a man,
As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,
A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy
She sat like patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more: but indeed
Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
I am all the daughters of my father's house,
And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this lady?
To her in haste; give her this jewel; say,
My love can give no place, bide no denay.
Nay, I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport,
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly
I would exult, man: you know, he brought me out o'
To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will
An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
How now, my metal of India!
Get ye all three into the box-tree: Malvolio's
O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock
There is example for't; the lady of the Strachy
O, peace! now he's deeply in: look how
Having been three months married to her, sitting in
O, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!
Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet
And then to have the humour of state; and after a
O peace, peace, peace! now, now.
Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make
Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar
And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
Saying, 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on
Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
I knew 'twas I; for many do call me fool.
Now is the woodcock near the gin.
O, peace! and the spirit of humour intimate reading
By my life, this is my lady's hand these be her
Her C's, her U's and her T's: why that?
Soft! and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she
This wins him, liver and all.
Jove knows I love: But who?
I may command where I adore;
But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore:
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.
What dish o' poison has she dressed him!
And with what wing the staniel cheques at it!
O, ay, make up that: he is now at a cold scent.
Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as
M,--Malvolio; M,--why, that begins my name.
Did not I say he would work it out? the cur is
M,--but then there is no consonancy in the sequel;
And O shall end, I hope.
Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry O!
Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see
M, O, A, I; this simulation is not as the former: and
She that would alter services with thee,
Daylight and champaign discovers not more: this is
I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross
I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade
Jove, I thank thee: I will smile; I will do
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension
I could marry this wench for this device.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
Shall I play my freedom at traytrip, and become thy
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that when
Nay, but say true; does it work upon him?
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Save thee, friend, and thy music: dost thou live by
No, sir, I live by the church.
No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for
I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by
So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a
You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is
Nay, that's certain; they that dally nicely with
I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir.
Why, sir, her name's a word; and to dally with that
Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words; and
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
Not so, sir, I do care for something; but in my
Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?
No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly: she
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun,
Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.
Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!
By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for
Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring
I understand you, sir; 'tis well begged.
The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
And to do that well craves a kind of wit:
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time,
And, like the haggard, cheque at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practise
As full of labour as a wise man's art
For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
I hope, sir, you are; and I am yours.
Will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous
I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the
Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain
That youth's a rare courtier: 'Rain odours;' well.
My matter hath no voice, to your own most pregnant
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment:
You're servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me!
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
O, by your leave, I pray you,
I bade you never speak again of him:
But, would you undertake another suit,
I had rather hear you to solicit that
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
A ring in chase of you: so did I abuse
Myself, my servant and, I fear me, you:
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you, in a shameful cunning,
Which you knew none of yours: what might you think?
Have you not set mine honour at the stake
And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown: a cypress, not a bosom,
Hideth my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
No, not a grize; for 'tis a vulgar proof,
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
O, world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf!
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you:
And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
Your were is alike to reap a proper man:
There lies your way, due west.
Then westward-ho! Grace and good disposition
You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
I would you were as I would have you be!
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon
Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.
Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
By maidhood, honour, truth and every thing,
I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,
But rather reason thus with reason fetter,
Love sought is good, but given unsought better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth
I have one heart, one bosom and one truth,
And that no woman has; nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu, good madam: never more
Will I my master's tears to you deplore.
Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the
Did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.
As plain as I see you now.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of
And they have been grand-jury-men since before Noah
She did show favour to the youth in your sight only
You should then have accosted her; and with some
An't be any way, it must be with valour; for policy
I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist as a
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
Go, write it in a martial hand; be curst and brief;
Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou
We'll call thee at the cubiculo: go.
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand
We shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll
Never trust me, then; and by all means stir on the
And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no
Look, where the youngest wren of nine comes.
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself
Christian, that means to be saved by believing
Most villanously; like a pedant that keeps a school
Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
I would not by my will have troubled you;
But, since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further chide you.
I could not stay behind you: my desire,
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth;
And not all love to see you, though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,
But jealousy what might befall your travel,
Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
Rough and unhospitable: my willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear,
I can no other answer make but thanks,
And thanks; and ever [         ] oft good turns
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay:
But, were my worth as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing. What's to do?
Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging.
I am not weary, and 'tis long to night:
I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame
I do not without danger walk these streets:
Once, in a sea-fight, 'gainst the count his galleys
I did some service; of such note indeed,
That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answer'd.
Belike you slew great number of his people.
The offence is not of such a bloody nature;
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument.
It might have since been answer'd in repaying
What we took from them; which, for traffic's sake,
Most of our city did: only myself stood out;
For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
Do not then walk too open.
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here's my purse.
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the town: there shall you have me.
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase; and your store,
I think, is not for idle markets, sir.
I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you
I have sent after him: he says he'll come;
How shall I feast him? what bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd.
Where is Malvolio? he is sad and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes:
He's coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He
Why, what's the matter? does he rave?
No. madam, he does nothing but smile: your
I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
Sad, lady! I could be sad: this does make some
Why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. It
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
To bed! ay, sweet-heart, and I'll come to thee.
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so and kiss
At your request! yes; nightingales answer daws.
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Where's
O, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than
Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all
Here he is, here he is. How is't with you, sir?
Go off; I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go
Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! did not
I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a
Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently
Do you know what you say?
La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes
Carry his water to the wise woman.
Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I
Prithee, hold thy peace; this is not the way: do
No way but gentleness; gently, gently: the fiend is
Why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?
Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man! 'tis not for
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Go, hang yourselves all! you are idle shallow
If this were played upon a stage now, I could
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.
Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
The house will be the quieter.
Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. My
More matter for a May morning.
Here's the challenge, read it: warrant there's
Ay, is't, I warrant him: do but read.
A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.
Very brief, and to exceeding good sense--less.
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law: good.
If this letter move him not, his legs cannot:
You may have very fit occasion for't: he is now in
Go, Sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner the
Nay, let me alone for swearing.
Now will not I deliver his letter: for the behavior
This will so fright them both that they will kill
Here he comes with your niece: give them way till
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message
I have said too much unto a heart of stone
And laid mine honour too unchary out:
There's something in me that reproves my fault;
But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
With the same 'havior that your passion bears
Here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture;
Refuse it not; it hath no tongue to vex you;
And I beseech you come again to-morrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honour saved may upon asking give?
Nothing but this; your true love for my master.
How with mine honour may I give him that
Which I have given to you?
Well, come again to-morrow: fare thee well:
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
That defence thou hast, betake thee to't: of what
You mistake, sir; I am sure no man hath any quarrel
You'll find it otherwise, I assure you: therefore,
I pray you, sir, what is he?
He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on
I will return again into the house and desire some
Sir, no; his indignation derives itself out of a
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by
I shall be much bound to you for't: I am one that
Why, man, he's a very devil; I have not seen such a
Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.
Ay, but he will not now be pacified: Fabian can
Plague on't, an I thought he had been valiant and so
I'll make the motion: stand here, make a good show
Marry, I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.
I have his horse to take up the quarrel:
I have persuaded him the youth's a devil.
He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants and
Give ground, if you see him furious.
Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy; the gentleman
Pray God, he keep his oath!
I do assure you, 'tis against my will.
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
You, sir! why, what are you?
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.
Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
Marry, will I, sir; and, for that I promised you,
I'll be as good as my word: he will bear you easily
This is the man; do thy office.
Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.
No, sir, no jot; I know your favour well,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.
Take him away: he knows I know him well.
But there's no remedy; I shall answer it.
What will you do, now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me
Much more for what I cannot do for you
Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed;
I must entreat of you some of that money.
For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,
And, part, being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
I'll lend you something: my having is not much;
I'll make division of my present with you:
Is't possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.
Nor know I you by voice or any feature:
I hate ingratitude more in a man
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Come, sir, I pray you, go.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death,
Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
And to his image, which methought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
What's that to us? The time goes by: away!
But O how vile an idol proves this god
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
In nature there's no blemish but the mind;
None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind:
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks o'erflourish'd by the devil.
The man grows mad: away with him! Come, come, sir.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly,
That he believes himself: so do not I.
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian: we'll
He named Sebastian: I my brother know
Yet living in my glass; even such and so
In favour was my brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate: O, if it prove,
Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love.
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.
Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow:
Let me be clear of thee.
Well held out, i' faith! No, I do not know you; nor
I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come
I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else: Thou
Vent my folly! he has heard that word of some
I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me: There's
By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men
Now, sir, have I met you again? there's for you.
Why, there's for thee, and there, and there. Are all
Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
This will I tell my lady straight: I would not be
Nay, let him alone: I'll go another way to work
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young
I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now? If
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two
Hold, Toby; on thy life I charge thee, hold!
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
Where manners ne'er were preach'd! out of my sight!
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
In this uncivil and thou unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this: thou shalt not choose but go:
Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
What relish is in this? how runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
Nay, come, I prithee; would thou'ldst be ruled by me!
O, say so, and so be!
Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard;
Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself
Bonos dies, Sir Toby: for, as the old hermit of
Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily
What, ho, I say! peace in this prison!
The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.
Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.
Out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man!
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged: good Sir
Topas, do not think I am mad: they have laid me
Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most
Why it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes,
I am not mad, Sir Topas: I say to you, this house is dark.
Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness
I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness:
Nay, I am for all waters.
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how
Tell me how thy lady does.'
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my
Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I
But as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no
They have here propertied me; keep me in darkness,
Advise you what you say; the minister is here.
Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
Maintain no words with him, good fellow. Who, I,
Merry, amen. I will, sir, I will.
Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am
Good fool, help me to some light and some paper: I
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper and
I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you
Believe me, I am not; I tell thee true.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his
Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree: I
In his rage and his wrath,
Cries, ah, ha! to the devil:
This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't;
And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet 'tis not madness. Where's Antonio, then?
I could not find him at the Elephant:
Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out.
His counsel now might do me golden service;
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust but that I am mad
Or else the lady's mad; yet, if 'twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
With such a smooth, discreet and stable bearing
As I perceive she does: there's something in't
That is deceiveable. But here the lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Now go with me and with this holy man
Into the chantry by: there, before him,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith;
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth. What do you say?
I'll follow this good man, and go with you;
And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine,
That they may fairly note this act of mine!
Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
Do not desire to see this letter.
This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
Ay, sir; we are some of her trappings.
I know thee well; how dost thou, my good fellow?
Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse
Just the contrary; the better for thy friends.
Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me;
By my troth, sir, no; though it please you to be
Thou shalt not be the worse for me: there's gold.
But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would
O, you give me ill counsel.
Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once,
Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a
Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old
Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind; one, two, three.
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw:
Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
That face of his I do remember well;
Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmear'd
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war:
A bawbling vessel was he captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable;
With which such scathful grapple did he make
With the most noble bottom of our fleet,
That very envy and the tongue of loss
Cried fame and honour on him. What's the matter?
That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy;
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg:
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side;
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me:
I know not what 'twas but distraction.
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
That most ingrateful boy there by your side,
From the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem; a wreck past hope he was:
His life I gave him and did thereto add
My love, without retention or restraint,
All his in dedication; for his sake
Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
Into the danger of this adverse town;
Drew to defend him when he was beset:
Where being apprehended, his false cunning,
Not meaning to partake with me in danger,
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use
When came he to this town?
To-day, my lord; and for three months before,
No interim, not a minute's vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
Here comes the countess: now heaven walks on earth.
But for thee, fellow; fellow, thy words are madness:
Three months this youth hath tended upon me;
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord,--
My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
What, to perverseness? you uncivil lady,
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
My soul the faithfull'st offerings hath breathed out
That e'er devotion tender'd! What shall I do?
Even what it please my lord, that shall become him.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
Kill what I love?--a savage jealousy
That sometimes savours nobly. But hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screws me from my true place in your favour,
Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still;
But this your minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his master's spite.
Come, boy, with me; my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love,
To spite a raven's heart within a dove.
And I, most jocund, apt and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above
Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Ay me, detested! how am I beguiled!
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long?
Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.
Ay, husband: can he that deny?
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Fear not, Cesario; take thy fortunes up;
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear'st.
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness what occasion now
Reveals before 'tis ripe, what thou dost know
Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me.
A contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthen'd by interchangement of your rings;
And all the ceremony of this compact
Seal'd in my function, by my testimony:
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
I have travell'd but two hours.
O thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be
When time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently
He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
The count's gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you:
You drew your sword upon me without cause;
But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I
Here comes Sir Toby halting; you shall hear more:
How now, gentleman! how is't with you?
That's all one: has hurt me, and there's the end
O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; his eyes
Then he's a rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?
I'll help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.
Will you help? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman:
But, had it been the brother of my blood,
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you:
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
We made each other but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural perspective, that is and is not!
How have the hours rack'd and tortured me,
How have you made division of yourself?
An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
Nor can there be that deity in my nature,
Of here and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd.
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What countryman? what name? what parentage?
Of Messaline: Sebastian was my father;
Such a Sebastian was my brother too,
So went he suited to his watery tomb:
If spirits can assume both form and suit
But am in that dimension grossly clad
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
O, that record is lively in my soul!
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both
But this my masculine usurp'd attire,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola: which to confirm,
I'll bring you to a captain in this town,
Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
I was preserved to serve this noble count.
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
But nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a maid;
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived,
You are betroth'd both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed; right noble is his blood.
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wreck.
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
And all those sayings will I overswear;
And those swearings keep as true in soul
As doth that orbed continent the fire
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
The captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maid's garments: he upon some action
Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit,
A gentleman, and follower of my lady's.
He shall enlarge him: fetch Malvolio hither:
And yet, alas, now I remember me,
They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance clearly banish'd his.
Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the staves's end as
Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers
No, madam, I do but read madness: an your ladyship
Prithee, read i' thy right wits.
So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits is to
Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little
This savours not much of distraction.
See him deliver'd, Fabian; bring him hither.
My lord so please you, these things further
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
One day shall crown the alliance on't, so please you,
Here at my house and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer.
Your master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you call'd me master for so long,
Here is my hand: you shall from this time be
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand:
Write from it, if you can, in hand or phrase;
Or say 'tis not your seal, nor your invention:
You can say none of this: well, grant it then
And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you,
To put on yellow stockings and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious geck and gull
That e'er invention play'd on? tell me why.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though, I confess, much like the character
But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then camest in smiling,
And in such forms which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content:
This practise hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wonder'd at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him: Maria writ
The letter at Sir Toby's great importance;
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
How with a sportful malice it was follow'd,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge;
If that the injuries be justly weigh'd
That have on both sides pass'd.
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
Why, 'some are born great, some achieve greatness,
But do you remember? 'Madam, why laugh you at such
I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace:
He hath not told us of the captain yet:
When that is known and golden time convents,
A solemn combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come;
For so you shall be, while you are a man;
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen.
When that I was and a little tiny boy,
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
A foolish thing was but a toy,
For the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came to man's estate,
But when I came, alas! to wive,
By swaggering could I never thrive,
But when I came unto my beds,
With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
A great while ago the world begun,
But that's all one, our play is done,
And we'll strive to please you every day.
